# 第三章：堆内存管理

3 Heap Memory Management
3.1 Introduction
3.1.1 Prerequisites
Being a competent C programmer is a prerequisite for using FreeRTOS, so this chapter assumes the reader is
familiar with concepts such as:
The different compiling and linking phases of building a C project.
What the stack and heap are.
The standard C library malloc() and free() functions.
3.1.2 Scope
This chapter covers:
When FreeRTOS allocates RAM.
The five example memory allocation schemes supplied with FreeRTOS.
Which memory allocation scheme to select.
3.1.3 Switching Between Static and Dynamic Memory Allocation
The following chapters introduce kernel objects such as tasks, queues, semaphores, and event groups. The
RAM required to hold these objects can be allocated statically at compile-time or dynamically at run time.
Dynamic allocation reduces design and planning effort, simplifies the API, and minimizes the RAM footprint.
Static allocation is more deterministic, removes the need to handle memory allocation failures, and removes
the risk of heap fragmentation (where the heap has enough free memory but not in one usable contiguous
block).
The FreeRTOS API functions that create kernel objects using statically allocated memory are only available
when configSUPPORT_STATIC_ALLOCATION is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h. The FreeRTOS API functions that
create kernel objects using dynamically allocated memory are only available when
configSUPPORT_DYNAMIC_ALLOCATION is either set to 1 or left undefined in FreeRTOSConfig.h. It is valid to
have both constants set to 1 simultaneously.
More information concerning configSUPPORT_STATIC_ALLOCATION is in section 3.4 Using Static Memory
Allocation.
3.1.4 Using Dynamic Memory Allocation
Dynamic memory allocation is a C programming concept, not a concept specific to either FreeRTOS or
multitasking. It is relevant to FreeRTOS because kernel objects can optionally be created using dynamically
allocated memory, and the general-purpose C library malloc() and free() functions may not be suitable for
one or more of the following reasons:
They are not always available on small embedded systems.
Their implementation can be relatively large, taking up valuable code space.
They are rarely thread-safe.

They are not deterministic; the amount of time taken to execute the functions will differ from call to call.
They can suffer from fragmentation (where the heap has enough free memory but not in one usable
contiguous block).
They can complicate the linker configuration.
They can be the source of difficult to debug errors if the heap space is allowed to grow into memory
used by other variables.
3.1.5 Options for Dynamic Memory Allocation
Early versions of FreeRTOS used a memory pools allocation scheme, where pools of different size memory
blocks are pre-allocated at compile-time, then returned by the memory allocation functions. Although block
allocation is common in real-time systems, it was removed from FreeRTOS because its inefficient use of RAM in
really small embedded systems led to many support requests.
FreeRTOS now treats memory allocation as part of the portable layer (instead of part of the core codebase).
This is because different embedded systems have different dynamic memory allocation and timing
requirements, so a single dynamic memory allocation algorithm will only ever be appropriate for a subset of
applications. Also, removing dynamic memory allocation from the core codebase enables application writers to
provide their own specific implementations when appropriate.
When FreeRTOS requires RAM it calls pvPortMalloc() instead of malloc(). Likewise, when FreeRTOS frees
previously allocated RAM it calls vPortFree() instead of free(). pvPortMalloc() has the same prototype as
the standard C library malloc() function, and vPortFree() has the same prototype as the standard C library
free() function.
pvPortMalloc() and vPortFree() are public functions, so they can also be called from application code.
FreeRTOS comes with five example implementations of pvPortMalloc() and vPortFree(), which are all
documented in this chapter. FreeRTOS applications can use one of the example implementations or provide
their own.
The five examples are defined in the heap_1.c, heap_2.c, heap_3.c, heap_4.c and heap_5.c source files
respectively, all of which are located in the FreeRTOS/Source/portable/MemMang directory.
3.2 Example Memory Allocation Schemes
3.2.1 Heap_1
It is common for small, dedicated embedded systems to only create tasks and other kernel objects before
starting the FreeRTOS scheduler. When this is the case, memory only gets (dynamically) allocated by the kernel
before the application starts to perform any real-time functionality, and the memory remains allocated for the
application's lifetime. This means the chosen allocation scheme does not have to consider the more complex
memory allocation issues, such as determinism and fragmentation, and can instead prioritise attributes such as
code size and simplicity.
Heap_1.c implements a very basic version of pvPortMalloc(), and does not implement vPortFree().
Applications that never delete a task or other kernel objects have the potential to use heap_1. Some
commercially critical and safety-critical systems that would otherwise prohibit the use of dynamic memory
allocation also have the potential to use heap_1. Critical systems often prohibit dynamic memory allocation

because of the uncertainties associated with non-determinism, memory fragmentation, and failed allocations.
Heap_1 is always deterministic and cannot fragment memory.
Heap_1's implementation of pvPortMalloc() simply subdivides a simple uint8_t array called the FreeRTOS
heap into smaller blocks each time it's called. The FreeRTOSConfig.h constant configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE sets
the size of the array in bytes. Implementing the heap as a statically allocated array makes FreeRTOS appear to
consume a lot of RAM because the heap becomes part of the FreeRTOS data.
Each dynamically allocated task results in two calls to pvPortMalloc(). The first allocates a task control block
(TCB), and the second the task's stack. Figure 3.1 demonstrates how heap_1 subdivides the simple array as
tasks get created.
Referring to Figure 3.1:
A shows the array before creating any tasks—the entire array is free.
B shows the array after creating one task.
C shows the array after creating three tasks.
allocated from the heap_1 array each time a task is created
 Figure 3.1 RAM being
3.2.2 Heap_2
Heap_2 is superseded by heap_4, which includes enhanced functionality. Heap_2 is kept in the FreeRTOS
distribution for backward compatibility and is not recommended for new designs.
Heap_2.c also works by subdividing an array dimensioned by the configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE constant. It uses a
best-fit algorithm to allocate memory, and, unlike heap_1, it does implement vPortFree(). Again,
implementing the heap as a statically allocated array makes FreeRTOS appear to consume a lot of RAM
because the heap becomes part of the FreeRTOS data.

The best-fit algorithm ensures that pvPortMalloc() uses the free block of memory that is closest in size to
the number of bytes requested. For example, consider the scenario where:
The heap contains three blocks of free memory that are 5 bytes, 25 bytes, and 100 bytes, respectively.
pvPortMalloc() requests 20 bytes of RAM.
The smallest free block of RAM into which the requested number of bytes fits is the 25-byte block, so
pvPortMalloc() splits the 25-byte block into one block of 20 bytes and one block of 5 bytes before returning
a pointer to the 20-byte block[^2]. The new 5-byte block remains available for future calls to pvPortMalloc().
[^2]: This is an oversimplification, because heap_2 stores information on the block sizes within the heap area,
so the sum of the two split blocks will actually be less than 25.
Unlike heap_4, heap_2 does not combine adjacent free blocks into a single larger block, so it is more
susceptible to fragmentation than heap_4. However, fragmentation is not an issue if the allocated and
subsequently freed blocks are always the same size.
allocated and freed from the heap_2 array as tasks are created and deleted
 Figure 3.2 RAM being
Figure 3.2 demonstrates how the best-fit algorithm works when a task is created, deleted, and created again.
Referring to Figure 3.2:
A shows the array after allocating three tasks. A large free block remains at the top of the array.
B shows the array after deleting one of the tasks. The large free block at the top of the array remains.
There are now also two smaller free blocks that previously held the TCB and stack of the deleted task.

C shows the situation after creating another task. Creating the task resulted in two calls to
pvPortMalloc() from within the xTaskCreate() API function, one to allocate a new TCB and the other
to allocate the task stack. Section 3.4 of this book describes xTaskCreate().
Every TCB is the same size, so the best-fit algorithm reuses the block of RAM that held the TCB of the
deleted task to hold the TCB of the created task.
If the size of the stack allocated to the newly created task is the same size as that allocated to the
previously deleted task, then the best-fit algorithm reuses the block of RAM that held the stack of the
deleted task to hold the stack of the created task.
The larger unallocated block at the top of the array remains untouched.
Heap_2 is not deterministic but is faster than most standard library implementations of malloc() and free().
3.2.3 Heap_3
Heap_3.c uses the standard library malloc() and free() functions, so the linker configuration defines the
heap size, and the configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE constant is not used.
Heap_3 makes malloc() and free() thread-safe by temporarily suspending the FreeRTOS scheduler for the
duration of their execution. Chapter 8, Resource Management, covers thread safety and scheduler suspension.
3.2.4 Heap_4
Like heap_1 and heap_2, heap_4 works by subdividing an array into smaller blocks. As before, the array is
statically allocated and dimensioned by configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE, which makes FreeRTOS appear to use a lot
of RAM as the heap becomes part of the FreeRTOS data.
Heap_4 uses a first-fit algorithm to allocate memory. Unlike heap_2, heap_4 combines (coalesces) adjacent free
blocks of memory into a single larger block, which minimizes the risk of memory fragmentation.
The first fit algorithm ensures pvPortMalloc() uses the first free block of memory that is large enough to
hold the number of bytes requested. For example, consider the scenario where:
The heap contains three blocks of free memory that, in the order in which they appear in the array, are 5
bytes, 200 bytes, and 100 bytes, respectively.
pvPortMalloc() requests 20 bytes of RAM.
The first free block of RAM that the requested number of bytes fits is the 200-byte block, so pvPortMalloc()
splits the 200-byte block into one block of 20 bytes and one of 180 bytes[^3], before returning a pointer to the
20-byte block. The new 180-byte block remains available to future calls to pvPortMalloc().
[^3]: This is an oversimplification, because heap_4 stores information on the block sizes within the heap area,
so the sum of the two split blocks will actually be less than 200 bytes.
Heap_4 combines (coalesces) adjacent free blocks into a single larger block, minimizing the risk of
fragmentation, and making it suitable for applications that repeatedly allocate and free different-sized blocks
of RAM.

Figure 3.3 RAM being allocated and freed from the heap_4 array
Figure 3.3 demonstrates how the heap_4 first-fit algorithm with memory coalescence works. Referring to Figure
3.3:
A shows the array after creating three tasks. A large free block remains at the top of the array.
B shows the array after deleting one of the tasks. The large free block at the top of the array remains.
There is now another free block where the TCB and stack of the deleted task used to be. Unlike in the
heap_2 example, heap_4 merges the two memory blocks that previously held the TCB and stack of the
deleted task, respectively, into a larger single free block.
C shows the situation after creating a FreeRTOS queue. Section 5.3 of this book describes the
xQueueCreate() API function used to allocate queues dynamically. xQueueCreate() calls
pvPortMalloc() to allocate the RAM used by the queue. As heap_4 uses a first-fit algorithm,
pvPortMalloc() allocates RAM from the first free RAM block that is large enough to hold the queue,
which in Figure 3.3, was the RAM freed by deleting the task. The queue does not consume all the RAM
in the free block, so the block is split into two, and the unused portion remains available to future calls
to pvPortMalloc().
D shows the situation after calling pvPortMalloc() directly from application code, rather than
indirectly by calling a FreeRTOS API function. The user allocated block was small enough to fit in the first
free block, which was the block between the memory allocated to the queue, and the memory allocated
to the TCB following it.
The memory freed by deleting the task has now split into three separate blocks; the first block holds the
queue, the second block holds the user allocated memory, and the third block remains free.
E shows the situation after deleting the queue, which automatically frees the memory allocated to the
deleted queue. There is now free memory on either side of the user allocated block.
F shows the situation after freeing the user allocated memory. The memory previously used by the user
allocated block has been combined with the free memory on either side to create a larger single free
block.

Heap_4 is not deterministic but is faster than most standard library implementations of malloc() and free().
3.2.5 Heap_5
Heap_5 uses the same allocation algorithm as heap_4. Unlike heap_4, which is limited to allocating memory
from a single array, heap_5 can combine memory from multiple separated memory spaces into a single heap.
Heap_5 is useful when the RAM provided by the system on which FreeRTOS is running does not appear as a
single contiguous (without space) block in the system's memory map.
3.2.6 Initialising heap_5: The vPortDefineHeapRegions() API Function
vPortDefineHeapRegions() initialises heap_5 by specifying the start address and size of each separate
memory area that makes up the heap managed by heap_5. Heap_5 is the only provided heap allocation
scheme that requires explicit initialisation and can't be used until after the call to
vPortDefineHeapRegions(). That means kernel objects, such as tasks, queues, and semaphores, cannot be
created dynamically until after the call to vPortDefineHeapRegions().
void vPortDefineHeapRegions( const HeapRegion_t * const pxHeapRegions ); 
Listing 3.1 The vPortDefineHeapRegions() API function prototype
vPortDefineHeapRegions() takes an array of HeapRegion_t structures as its only parameter. Each structure
defines the start address and size of a memory block that will become part of the heap—the whole array of
structures defines the entire heap space.
typedef struct HeapRegion 
{ 
    /* The start address of a block of memory that will be part of the heap.*/ 
    uint8_t *pucStartAddress; 
    /* The size of the block of memory in bytes. */ 
    size_t xSizeInBytes; 
} HeapRegion_t; 
Listing 3.2 The HeapRegion_t structure
Parameters:
pxHeapRegions
A pointer to the start of an array of HeapRegion_t structures. Each structure defines the start address
and size of a memory block that will become part of the heap.
The HeapRegion_t structures in the array must be ordered by start address; the HeapRegion_t
structure that describes the memory area with the lowest start address must be the first structure in the
array, and the HeapRegion_t structure that describes the memory area with the highest start address
must be the last structure in the array.

Mark the end of the array with a HeapRegion_t structure that has its pucStartAddress member set to
NULL.
By way of example, consider the hypothetical memory map shown in Figure 3.4 A which contains three
separate blocks of RAM: RAM1, RAM2 and RAM3. It is assumed executable code is placed in read-only
memory, which is not shown.
Figure 3.4 Memory Map
Listing 3.3 shows an array of HeapRegion_t structures that together describe the three blocks of RAM in their
entirety.
/* Define the start address and size of the three RAM regions. */
#define RAM1_START_ADDRESS ( ( uint8_t * ) 0x00010000 )
#define RAM1_SIZE ( 64 * 1024 ) 
#define RAM2_START_ADDRESS ( ( uint8_t * ) 0x00020000 )
#define RAM2_SIZE ( 32 * 1024 ) 
#define RAM3_START_ADDRESS ( ( uint8_t * ) 0x00030000 )
#define RAM3_SIZE ( 32 * 1024 ) 
/* Create an array of HeapRegion_t definitions, with an index for each 
   of the three RAM regions, and terminate the array with a HeapRegion_t 
   structure containing a NULL address. The HeapRegion_t structures must 
   appear in start address order, with the structure that contains the 
   lowest start address appearing first. */
const HeapRegion_t xHeapRegions[] = 
{ 
    { RAM1_START_ADDRESS, RAM1_SIZE },

{ RAM2_START_ADDRESS, RAM2_SIZE }, 
    { RAM3_START_ADDRESS, RAM3_SIZE }, 
    { NULL,               0         } /* Marks the end of the array. */ 
}; 
int main( void )
{ 
    /* Initialize heap_5. */ 
    vPortDefineHeapRegions( xHeapRegions ); 
    /* Add application code here. */ 
} 
Listing 3.3 An array of HeapRegion_t structures that together describe the 3 regions of RAM in their entirety
Although Listing 3.3 correctly describes the RAM, it does not demonstrate a usable example because it
allocates all the RAM to the heap, leaving no RAM free for use by other variables.
The linking phase of the build process allocates a RAM address to each variable. The RAM available for use by
the linker is normally described by a linker configuration file, such as a linker script. In Figure 3.4 B it is
assumed the linker script included information on RAM1, but did not include information on RAM2 or RAM3.
As a result, the linker placed variables in RAM1, leaving only the portion of RAM1 above address 0x0001nnnn
available for use by heap_5. The actual value of 0x0001nnnn depends on the combined size of all the variables
included in the application. The linker has left all of RAM2 and all of RAM3 unused, leaving the whole of RAM2
and the whole of RAM3 available for use by heap_5.
The code shown in Listing 3.3 would cause the RAM allocated to heap_5 below address 0x0001nnnn to overlap
the RAM used to hold variables. If you set the start address of the first HeapRegion_t structure within the
xHeapRegions[] array to 0x0001nnnn, rather than a start address of 0x00010000, the heap will not overlap
with RAM used by the linker. However, that is not a recommended solution because:
The start address might not be easy to determine.
The amount of RAM used by the linker might change in future builds, which would make an update to
the start address used in the HeapRegion_t structure necessary.
The build tools will not know, and therefore cannot warn the application writer, if the RAM used by the
linker and the RAM used by heap_5 overlap.
Listing 3.4 demonstrates a more convenient and maintainable example. It declares an array called ucHeap.
ucHeap is a normal variable, so it becomes part of the data allocated to RAM1 by the linker. The first
HeapRegion_t structure in the xHeapRegions array describes the start address and size of ucHeap, so ucHeap
becomes part of the memory managed by heap_5. The size of ucHeap can be increased until the RAM used by
the linker consumes all of RAM1, as shown in Figure 3.4 C.
/* Define the start address and size of the two RAM regions not used by 
   the linker. */
#define RAM2_START_ADDRESS ( ( uint8_t * ) 0x00020000 )
#define RAM2_SIZE ( 32 * 1024 ) 
#define RAM3_START_ADDRESS ( ( uint8_t * ) 0x00030000 )
#define RAM3_SIZE ( 32 * 1024 )

/* Declare an array that will be part of the heap used by heap_5. The 
   array will be placed in RAM1 by the linker. */
#define RAM1_HEAP_SIZE ( 30 * 1024 )
static uint8_t ucHeap[ RAM1_HEAP_SIZE ]; 
/* Create an array of HeapRegion_t definitions. Whereas in Listing 3.5 the 
   first entry described all of RAM1, so heap_5 will have used all of 
   RAM1, this time the first entry only describes the ucHeap array, so 
   heap_5 will only use the part of RAM1 that contains the ucHeap array. 
   The HeapRegion_t structures must still appear in start address order, 
   with the structure that contains the lowest start address appearing first. */ 
const HeapRegion_t xHeapRegions[] = 
{ 
    { ucHeap,             RAM1_HEAP_SIZE }, 
    { RAM2_START_ADDRESS, RAM2_SIZE }, 
    { RAM3_START_ADDRESS, RAM3_SIZE }, 
    { NULL,               0 }           /* Marks the end of the array. */ 
}; 
Listing 3.4 An array of HeapRegion_t structures that describe all of RAM2, all of RAM3, but only part of RAM1
The advantages of the technique demonstrated in Listing 3.4 include:
It is not necessary to use a hard-coded start address.
The address used in the HeapRegion_t structure will be set automatically by the linker, so it will always
be correct, even if the amount of RAM used by the linker changes in future builds.
It is impossible for RAM allocated to heap_5 to overlap data placed into RAM1 by the linker.
The application will not link if ucHeap is too big.
3.3 Heap Related Utility Functions and Macros
3.3.1 Defining the Heap Start Address
Heap_1, heap_2 and heap_4 allocate memory from a statically allocated array dimensioned by
configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE. This section refers to these allocation schemes collectively as heap_n.
Sometimes the heap needs to be placed at a specific memory address. For example, the stack allocated to a
dynamically created task comes from the heap, so it might be necessary to locate the heap in fast internal
memory rather than slow external memory. (See the sub-section Placing Task Stacks in Fast Memory below for
another method of allocating task stacks in fast memory). The configAPPLICATION_ALLOCATED_HEAP
compile-time configuration constant enables the application to declare the array in place of the declaration
that would otherwise be in the heap_n.c source file. Declaring the array in the application code enables the
application writer to specify its start address.
If configAPPLICATION_ALLOCATED_HEAP is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h, or left undefined, the application
that uses FreeRTOS must allocate a uint8_t array called ucHeap and dimensioned by the
configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE constant.

The syntax required to place a variable at a specific memory address is dependent on the compiler in use, so
refer to your compiler's documentation. Examples for two compilers follow:
Listing 3.5 shows the syntax required by the GCC compiler to declare the array and place the array in a
memory section called .my_heap.
Listing 3.6 shows the syntax required by the IAR compiler to declare the array and place the array at the
absolute memory address 0x20000000.
uint8_t ucHeap[ configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE ] __attribute__ ( ( section( ".my_heap" ) ) 
); 
Listing 3.5 Using GCC syntax to declare the array that will be used by heap_4, and place the array in a memory
section named .my_heap
uint8_t ucHeap[ configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE ] @ 0x20000000; 
Listing 3.6 Using IAR syntax to declare the array that will be used by heap_4, and place the array at the absolute
address 0x20000000
3.3.2 The xPortGetFreeHeapSize() API Function
The xPortGetFreeHeapSize() API function returns the number of free bytes in the heap at the time the
function is called. It does not provide information on heap fragmentation.
xPortGetFreeHeapSize() is not implemented for heap_3.
size_t xPortGetFreeHeapSize( void ); 
Listing 3.7 The xPortGetFreeHeapSize() API function prototype
Return value:
xPortGetFreeHeapSize() returns the number of bytes that remain unallocated in the heap at the time
it is called.
3.3.3 The xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() API Function
The xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() API function returns the minimum number of unallocated bytes
that have ever existed in the heap since the FreeRTOS application started executing.
The value returned by xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() indicates how close the application has ever
come to running out of heap space. For example, if xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() returns 200, then,
at some time since the application started executing, it came within 200 bytes of running out of heap space.
xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() can also be used to optimise the heap size. For example, if
xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() returns 2000 after executing the code that you know has the highest

heap usage, configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE can be reduced by up to 2000 bytes.
xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() is only implemented in heap_4 and heap_5.
size_t xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize( void ); 
Listing 3.8 The xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() API function prototype
Return value:
xPortGetMinimumEverFreeHeapSize() returns the minimum number of unallocated bytes that existed
in the heap since the FreeRTOS application started executing.
3.3.4 The vPortGetHeapStats() API Function
Heap_4 and heap_5 implement vPortGetHeapStats(), which completes the HeapStats_t structure pass by
reference as the function's only parameter.
Listing 3.9 shows the vPortGetHeapStats() function prototype. Listing 3.10 shows the HeapStats_t
structure members.
void vPortGetHeapStats( HeapStats_t *xHeapStats ); 
Listing 3.9 The vPortGetHeapStatus() API function prototype
/* Prototype of the vPortGetHeapStats() function. */
void vPortGetHeapStats( HeapStats_t *xHeapStats ); 
/* Definition of the HeapStats_t structure. All sizes specified in bytes. */
typedef struct xHeapStats 
{ 
    /* The total heap size currently available - this is the sum of all the 
       free blocks, not the largest available block. */ 
    size_t xAvailableHeapSpaceInBytes; 
    /* The size of the largest free block within the heap at the time 
       vPortGetHeapStats() is called. */ 
    size_t xSizeOfLargestFreeBlockInBytes; 
    /* The size of the smallest free block within the heap at the time 
       vPortGetHeapStats() is called. */ 
    size_t xSizeOfSmallestFreeBlockInBytes; 
    /* The number of free memory blocks within the heap at the time 
       vPortGetHeapStats() is called. */ 
    size_t xNumberOfFreeBlocks; 
    /* The minimum amount of total free memory (sum of all free blocks)

there has been in the heap since the system booted. */ 
    size_t xMinimumEverFreeBytesRemaining; 
    /* The number of calls to pvPortMalloc() that have returned a valid 
       memory block. */ 
    size_t xNumberOfSuccessfulAllocations; 
    /* The number of calls to vPortFree() that has successfully freed a 
       block of memory. */ 
    size_t xNumberOfSuccessfulFrees; 
} HeapStats_t; 
Listing 3.10 The HeapStatus_t() structure
3.3.5 Collecting Per-task Heap Usage Statistics
The vTaskGetInfo() API function, documented in section TBD-RB of this book, populates a TaskStatus_t
structure with information about a task. If the configTRACK_TASK_MEMORY_ALLOCATIONS compile-time
constant is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h, the structure includes the following additional information:
The number of times the task called pvPortMalloc().
The number of times the task called vPortFree().
The number of heap bytes allocated by the task that have not yet been freed by any task at the time
vTaskGetInfo() was called.
The maximum amount of heap memory allocated by the task at any given time since the task started.
3.3.6 Malloc Failed Hook Functions
Like the standard library malloc() function, pvPortMalloc() returns NULL if it cannot allocate the requested
amount of RAM. The malloc failed hook (or callback) is an application-provided function that gets called if
pvPortMalloc() returns NULL. You must set configUSE_MALLOC_FAILED_HOOK to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h in
order for the callback to occur. If the malloc failed hook gets called inside a FreeRTOS API function that uses
dynamic memory allocation to create a kernel object, the object is not created.
If configUSE_MALLOC_FAILED_HOOK is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h, then the application must provide a
malloc failed hook function with the name and prototype shown in Listing 3.11. The application can implement
the function in any way appropriate for the application. Many of the provided FreeRTOS demo applications
treat an allocation failure as a fatal error, but that is not the best practice for production systems, which should
gracefully recover from allocation failures.
void vApplicationMallocFailedHook( void ); 
Listing 3.11 The malloc failed hook function name and prototype
3.3.7 Placing Task Stacks in Fast Memory
Because stacks are written to and read from at a high rate, they should be placed in fast memory, but that
might not be where you want the heap to reside. FreeRTOS uses the pvPortMallocStack() and

vPortFreeStack() macros to optionally enable stacks that are allocated within the FreeRTOS API code to
have their own memory allocator. If you want the stack to come from the heap managed by pvPortMalloc()
then leave pvPortMallocStack() and vPortFreeStack() undefined as they default to calling
pvPortMalloc() and vPortFree(), respectively. Otherwise, define the macros to call application-provided
functions as shown in Listing 3.12.
/* Functions provided by the application writer than allocate and free 
   memory from a fast area of RAM. */ 
void *pvMallocFastMemory( size_t xWantedSize ); 
void vPortFreeFastMemory( void *pvBlockToFree ); 
/* Add the following to FreeRTOSConfig.h to map the pvPortMallocStack() 
   and vPortFreeStack() macros to the functions that use fast memory. */ 
#define pvPortMallocStack( x ) pvMallocFastMemory( x ) 
#define vPortFreeStack( x ) vPortFreeFastMemory( x )
Listing 3.12 Mapping the pvPortMallocStack() and vPortFreeStack() macros to an application defined memory
allcator
3.4 Using Static Memory Allocation
Section 3.1.4 lists some of the disadvantages that come with dynamic memory allocation. To avoid those
issues, static memory allocation allows the developer to explicity create every memory block needed by the
application. This has the following advantages:
All required memory is known at compile time.
All memory is deterministic.
There are other advantages, but with these advantages come a few complications. The main complication is
the addition of a few additional user functions to manage some kernel memory, and the second complication
is the need to ensure all static memory is declared in a suitable scope.
3.4.1 Enabling Static Memory Allocation
Static memory allocation is enabled by setting configSUPPORT_STATIC_ALLOCATION to 1 in
FreeRTOSConfig.h. When this configuration is enabled, the kernel enables all the static versions of the kernel
functions. These are:
xTaskCreateStatic
xEventGroupCreateStatic
xEventGroupGetStaticBuffer
xQueueGenericCreateStatic
xQueueGenericGetStaticBuffers
xQueueCreateMutexStatic
if configUSE_MUTEXES is 1

xQueueCreateCountingSemaphoreStatic
if configUSE_COUNTING_SEMAPHORES is 1
xStreamBufferGenericCreateStatic
xStreamBufferGetStaticBuffers
xTimerCreateStatic
if configUSE_TIMERS is 1
xTimerGetStaticBuffer
if configUSE_TIMERS is 1
These functions will be explained in the appropriate chapters in this book.
3.4.2 Static Internal Kernel Memory
When the static memory allocator is enabled, the idle task and the timer task (if enabled) will use static
memory supplied by user functions. These user functions are:
vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory
if configUSE_TIMERS is 1
vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory
3.4.2.1 vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory
If configSUPPORT_STATIC_ALLOCATION and configUSE_TIMERS are both enabled, the kernel will call
vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory() to allow the application to create and return a memory buffer for the
timer task TCB and the timer task stack. The function will also return the size of the timer task stack. A
suggested implementation of the timer task memory function is shown in listing 3.13.
void vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory( StaticTask_t **ppxTimerTaskTCBBuffer, 
                                     StackType_t **ppxTimerTaskStackBuffer, 
                                     uint32_t *pulTimerTaskStackSize )
{ 
  /* If the buffers to be provided to the Timer task are declared inside this 
  function then they must be declared static - otherwise they will be allocated on 
  the stack and hence would not exists after this function exits. */ 
  static StaticTask_t xTimerTaskTCB; 
  static StackType_t uxTimerTaskStack[ configMINIMAL_STACK_SIZE ]; 
  /* Pass out a pointer to the StaticTask_t structure in which the Timer task's 
  state will be stored. */ 
  *ppxTimerTaskTCBBuffer = &xTimerTaskTCB; 
  /* Pass out the array that will be used as the Timer task's stack. */ 
  *ppxTimerTaskStackBuffer = uxTimerTaskStack; 
  /* Pass out the stack size of the array pointed to by *ppxTimerTaskStackBuffer. 
  Note the stack size is a count of StackType_t */ 
  *pulTimerTaskStackSize = sizeof(uxTimerTaskStack) / sizeof(*uxTimerTaskStack); 
} 
Listing 3.13 Typical implementation of vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory

Since there is only a single timer task in any system including SMP, a valid solution to the timer task memory
problem is to allocate static buffers in the vApplicationGetTimeTaskMemory() function and return the
buffer pointers to the kernel.
3.4.2.2 vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory
The idle task is run when a core runs out of scheduled work. The idle task performs some housekeeping and
can also trigger the user's vTaskIdleHook() if it is enabled. In a symetric multiprocessing system (SMP) there
are also non-housekeeping idle tasks for each of the remaining cores, but these are statically allocated
internally to configMINIMUM_STACK_SIZE bytes.
The vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory function is called to allow the application to create the needed
buffers for the "main" idle task. Listing 3.14 shows a typical implementation of the
vApplicationIdleTaskMemory() function using static local variables to create the needed buffers.
void vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory( StaticTask_t **ppxIdleTaskTCBBuffer, 
                                    StackType_t **ppxIdleTaskStackBuffer, 
                                    uint32_t *pulIdleTaskStackSize )
{ 
  static StaticTask_t xIdleTaskTCB; 
  static StackType_t uxIdleTaskStack[ configMINIMAL_STACK_SIZE ]; 
  *ppxIdleTaskTCBBuffer = &xIdleTaskTCB; 
  *ppxIdleTaskStackBuffer = uxIdleTaskStack; 
  *pulIdleTaskStackSize = configMINIMAL_STACK_SIZE; 
} 
Listing 3.14 Typical implementation of vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory

4 Task Management
4.1 Introduction
4.1.1 Scope
This chapter covers:
How FreeRTOS allocates processing time to each task in an application.
How FreeRTOS chooses which task should execute at any given time.
How the relative priority of each task affects system behavior.
The states that a task can exist in.
This chapter also discusses:
How to implement tasks.
How to create one or more instances of a task.
How to use the task parameter.
How to change the priority of a task that has already been created.
How to delete a task.
How to implement periodic processing using a task. (A later chapter describes how to do the same using
software timers.)
When the idle task will execute and how it can be used.
The concepts presented in this chapter are fundamental to understanding how to use FreeRTOS and how
FreeRTOS applications behave. Therefore, this is the most detailed chapter in the book.
4.2 Task Functions
Tasks are implemented as C functions. Tasks must implement the expected function prototype shown in Listing
4.1. which takes a void pointer parameter and returns void.
void vATaskFunction( void * pvParameters ); 
Listing 4.1 The task function prototype
Each task is a small program in its own right. It has an entry point, will normally run forever in an infinite loop,
and does not exit. Listing 4.2 shows the structure of a typical task.
A FreeRTOS task must not be allowed to return from the function that implements it in any way. It must not
contain a 'return' statement and must not be allowed to execute past the end of its implementing function. If a
task is no longer required, it should be explicitly deleted as demonstrated in Listing 4.2.
A single task function definition can be used to create any number of tasks where each created task is a
separate execution instance. Each instance has its own stack and thus its own copy of any automatic (stack)
variables defined within the task itself.

void vATaskFunction( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    /* 
     * Stack-allocated variables can be declared normally when inside a function. 
     * Each instance of a task created using this example function will have its 
     * own separate instance of lStackVariable allocated on the task's stack. 
     */ 
    long lStackVariable = 0; 
    /* 
     * In contrast to stack allocated variables, variables declared with the 
`static` 
     * keyword are allocated to a specific location in memory by the linker. 
     * This means that all tasks calling vATaskFunction will share the same 
     * instance of lStaticVariable. 
     */ 
    static long lStaticVariable = 0; 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* The code to implement the task functionality will go here. */ 
    } 
    /* 
     * If the task implementation ever exits the above loop, then the task 
     * must be deleted before reaching the end of its implementing function. 
     * When NULL is passed as a parameter to the vTaskDelete() API function, 
     * this indicates that the task to be deleted is the calling (this) task. 
     */ 
    vTaskDelete( NULL ); 
} 
Listing 4.2 The structure of a typical task function
4.3 Top Level Task States
An application may consist of many tasks. If the processor running the application includes a single core, then
only one task may be executing at any given time. This implies that a task may exist in one of two states:
Running and Not Running. This simplistic model is considered first. Later in this chapter we describe the several
sub-states of the Not Running state.
A task is in the Running state when the processor is executing that task's code. When a task is in the Not
Running state, the task is paused and its state has been saved so that it may resume execution the next time
the scheduler decides it should enter the Running state. When a task resumes execution, it does so from the
instruction it was about to execute before it left the Running state.

4.1 Top level task states and transitions
 Figure
A task transitioned from the Not Running state to the Running state is said to have been "switched in" or
"swapped in". Conversely, a task transitioned from the Running state to the Not Running state is said to have
been "switched out" or "swapped out". The FreeRTOS scheduler is the only entity that can switch a task in and
out of the Running state.
4.4 Task Creation
Six API functions may be used to create tasks: xTaskCreate(), xTaskCreateStatic(),
xTaskCreateRestricted(), xTaskCreateRestrictedStatic(), xTaskCreateAffinitySet(), and
xTaskCreateStaticAffinitySet()
Each task requires two blocks of RAM: one to hold its Task Control Block (TCB) and one to store its stack.
FreeRTOS API functions with "Static" in their names use pre-allocated blocks of RAM passed into the functions
as parameters. Conversely, API functions without "Static" in their names allocate the required RAM dynamically
at runtime from the system heap.
Some FreeRTOS ports support tasks running in a "restricted" or "unprivileged" mode. FreeRTOS API functions
with "Restricted" in their names create tasks that execute with limited access to the system's memory. API
functions without "Restricted" in their names create tasks that execute in "privileged mode" and have access to
the system's entire memory map.
FreeRTOS ports that support Symmetric Multi Processing (SMP) allow different tasks to run simultaneously on
multiple cores of the same CPU. For these ports, you may specify which core a task will run on by using
functions with "Affinity" in the name.
The FreeRTOS task creation API functions are quite complex. Most examples in this document use
xTaskCreate() because it is the simplest of these functions.
4.4.1 The xTaskCreate() API Function

Listing 4.3 shows the xTaskCreate() API function prototype. xTaskCreateStatic() has two additional
parameters that point to the memory pre-allocated to hold the task's data structure and stack, respectively.
Section 2.5: Data Types and Coding Style Guide describes the data types and naming conventions used.
BaseType_t xTaskCreate( TaskFunction_t pvTaskCode, 
                        const char * const pcName, 
                        configSTACK_DEPTH_TYPE usStackDepth, 
                        void * pvParameters, 
                        UBaseType_t uxPriority, 
                        TaskHandle_t * pxCreatedTask ); 
Listing 4.3 The xTaskCreate() API function prototype
xTaskCreate() Parameters and return value:
pvTaskCode
Tasks are simply C functions that never exit and, as such, are normally implemented as an infinite loop.
The pvTaskCode parameter is simply a pointer to the function that implements the task (in effect, just
the function's name).
pcName
A descriptive name for the task. FreeRTOS does not use this in any way and it is included purely as a
debugging aid. Identifying a task by a human-readable name is much simpler than identifying it by its
handle.
The application-defined constant configMAX_TASK_NAME_LEN defines the maximum length a task name
can be, including the NULL terminator. Supplying a longer string results in the string being truncated.
usStackDepth
Specifies the size of the stack to allocate for use by the task. Use xTaskCreateStatic() instead of
xTaskCreate() to use pre-allocated memory instead of dynamically allocated memory.
Note the value specifies the number of words the stack can hold, not the number of bytes. For example,
if the stack is 32-bits wide and usStackDepth is 128, then xTaskCreate() allocates 512 bytes of stack
space (128 * 4 bytes).
configSTACK_DEPTH_TYPE is a macro that allows the application writer to specify the data type used to
hold stack sizes. configSTACK_DEPTH_TYPE defaults to uint16_t if left undefined, so #define
configSTACK_DEPTH_TYPE to unsigned long or size_t in FreeRTOSConfig.h if the stack depth
multiplied by the stack width is greater than 65535 (the largest possible 16-bit number).
Section 13.3 Stack Overflow, describes a practical method of choosing an optimal stack size.
pvParameters
Functions that implement tasks accept a single void pointer (void *) parameter. pvParameters is the
value passed into the task using that parameter.

uxPriority
Defines the task's priority. 0 is the lowest priority and (configMAX_PRIORITIES – 1) is the highest
priority. Section 4.5 describes the user defined configMAX_PRIORITIES constant.
If a uxPriority greater than (configMAX_PRIORITIES – 1) is defined, it will be capped to
(configMAX_PRIORITIES – 1).
pxCreatedTask
Pointer to a location to store a handle to the created task. This handle may be used in future API calls to,
for example, change the task's priority or delete the task.
pxCreatedTask is an optional parameter and may be set to NULL if the task's handle is not required.
Return values
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
This indicates the task was created successfully.
pdFAIL
This indicates there was not enough heap memory available to create the task. Chapter 3 provides
more information on heap memory management.
Example 4.1 Creating tasks
The following example demonstrates the steps needed to create two simple tasks and then start the newly
created tasks. The tasks simply print out a string periodically by using a crude busy loop to create the period
delay. Both tasks are created at the same priority and are identical except for the string they print out—see
Listing 4.4 and Listing 4.5 for their respective implementations. See chapter 8 for warnings about using
printf() in tasks.
void vTask1( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    /* ulCount is declared volatile to ensure it is not optimized out. */ 
    volatile unsigned long ulCount; 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Print out the name of the current task task. */ 
        vPrintLine( "Task 1 is running" ); 
        /* Delay for a period. */ 
        for( ulCount = 0; ulCount < mainDELAY_LOOP_COUNT; ulCount++ ) 
        { 
            /* 
             * This loop is just a very crude delay implementation. There is 
             * nothing to do in here. Later examples will replace this crude

* loop with a proper delay/sleep function. 
             */ 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.4 Implementation of the first task used in Example 4.1
void vTask2( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    /* ulCount is declared volatile to ensure it is not optimized out. */ 
    volatile unsigned long ulCount; 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented in an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Print out the name of this task. */ 
        vPrintLine( "Task 2 is running" ); 
        /* Delay for a period. */ 
        for( ulCount = 0; ulCount < mainDELAY_LOOP_COUNT; ulCount++ ) 
        { 
            /* 
             * This loop is just a very crude delay implementation. There is 
             * nothing to do in here. Later examples will replace this crude 
             * loop with a proper delay/sleep function. 
             */ 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.5 Implementation of the second task used in Example 4.1
The main() function creates the tasks before starting the scheduler—see Listing 4.6 for its implementation.
int main( void )
{ 
    /* 
     * Variables declared here may no longer exist after starting the FreeRTOS 
     * scheduler. Do not attempt to access variables declared on the stack used 
     * by main() from tasks. 
     */ 
    /* 
     * Create one of the two tasks. Note that a real application should check 
     * the return value of the xTaskCreate() call to ensure the task was 
     * created successfully. 
     */ 
    xTaskCreate( vTask1,  /* Pointer to the function that implements the task.*/ 
                 "Task 1",/* Text name for the task. */

1000,    /* Stack depth in words. */ 
                 NULL,    /* This example does not use the task parameter. */ 
                 1,       /* This task will run at priority 1. */ 
                 NULL );  /* This example does not use the task handle. */ 
    /* Create the other task in exactly the same way and at the same priority.*/ 
    xTaskCreate( vTask2, "Task 2", 1000, NULL, 1, NULL ); 
    /* Start the scheduler so the tasks start executing. */ 
    vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    /* 
     * If all is well main() will not reach here because the scheduler will now 
     * be running the created tasks. If main() does reach here then there was 
     * not enough heap memory to create either the idle or timer tasks 
     * (described later in this book). Chapter 3 provides more information on 
     * heap memory management. 
     */ 
    for( ;; ); 
} 
Listing 4.6 Starting the Example 4.1 tasks
Executing the example produces the output shown in Figure 4.2.
C:\Temp>rtosdemo 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Figure 4.2 The output produced when executing Example 4.1[^4]
[^4]: The screen shot shows each task printing out its message exactly once before the next task executes. This
is an artificial scenario that results from using the FreeRTOS Windows simulator. The Windows simulator is not
truly real time. Also, writing to the Windows console takes a relatively long time and results in a chain of
Windows system calls. Executing the same code on a genuine embedded target with a fast and non-blocking

print function may result in each task printing its string many times before being switched out to allow the
other task to run.
Figure 4.2 shows the two tasks appearing to execute simultaneously; however, both tasks execute on the same
processor core, so that cannot be the case. In reality, both tasks are rapidly entering and exiting the Running
state. Both tasks are running at the same priority and so share time on the same processor core. Figure 4.3
shows their actual execution pattern.
The arrow along the bottom of Figure 4.3 shows time passing from time t1 onwards. The colored lines show
which task is executing at each point in time—for example, Task 1 is executing between times t1 and t2.
Only one task can exist in the Running state at any one time. So, as one task enters the Running state (the task
is switched in), the other enters the Not Running state (the task is switched out).
4.3 The actual execution pattern of the two Example 4.1 tasks
 Figure
Example 4.1 created both tasks from within main(), prior to starting the scheduler. It is also possible to create
a task from within another task. For example, Task 2 could have been created from within Task 1, as shown by
Listing 4.7.
void vTask1( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    const char *pcTaskName = "Task 1 is running\r\n"; 
    volatile unsigned long ul; /* volatile to ensure ul is not optimized away. */ 
    /* 
     * If this task code is executing then the scheduler must already have

* been started. Create the other task before entering the infinite loop. 
     */ 
    xTaskCreate( vTask2, "Task 2", 1000, NULL, 1, NULL ); 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Print out the name of this task. */ 
        vPrintLine( pcTaskName ); 
        /* Delay for a period. */ 
        for( ul = 0; ul < mainDELAY_LOOP_COUNT; ul++ ) 
        { 
            /* 
             * This loop is just a very crude delay implementation. There is 
             * nothing to do in here. Later examples will replace this crude 
             * loop with a proper delay/sleep function. 
             */ 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.7 Creating a task from within another task after the scheduler has started
Example 4.2 Using the task parameter
The two tasks created in Example 4.1 are almost identical, the only difference between them is the text string
they print out. If you create two instances of a single task implementation, and use the task parameter to pass
the string into each instance, this would remove the duplication.
Example 4.2 replaces the two task functions used in Example 4.1 with a single task function called
vTaskFunction(), as shown in Listing 4.8. Note how the task parameter is cast to a char * to obtain the
string the task should print out.
void vTaskFunction( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    char *pcTaskName; 
    volatile unsigned long ul; /* volatile to ensure ul is not optimized away. */ 
    /* 
     * The string to print out is passed in via the parameter. Cast this to a 
     * character pointer. 
     */ 
    pcTaskName = ( char * ) pvParameters; 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented in an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Print out the name of this task. */ 
        vPrintLine( pcTaskName );

/* Delay for a period. */ 
        for( ul = 0; ul < mainDELAY_LOOP_COUNT; ul++ ) 
        { 
            /* 
             * This loop is just a very crude delay implementation. There is 
             * nothing to do in here. Later exercises will replace this crude 
             * loop with a proper delay/sleep function. 
             */ 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.8 The single task function used to create two tasks in Example 4.2
Listing 4.9 creates two instances of the task implemented by vTaskFunction(), using the task's parameter to
pass a different string into each. Both tasks execute independently under the control of the FreeRTOS
scheduler and with their own stack, and so with their own copies of the pcTaskName and ul variables.
/* 
 * Define the strings that will be passed in as the task parameters. These are 
 * defined const and not on the stack used by main() to ensure they remain 
 * valid when the tasks are executing. 
 */
static const char * pcTextForTask1 = "Task 1 is running"; 
static const char * pcTextForTask2 = "Task 2 is running"; 
int main( void )
{ 
    /* 
     * Variables declared here may no longer exist after starting the FreeRTOS 
     * scheduler. Do not attempt to access variables declared on the stack used 
     * by main() from tasks. 
     */ 
    /* Create one of the two tasks. */ 
    xTaskCreate( vTaskFunction,             /* Pointer to the function that 
                                               implements the task. */ 
                 "Task 1",                  /* Text name for the task. This is to 
                                               facilitate debugging only. */ 
                 1000,                      /* Stack depth - small 
microcontrollers 
                                               will use much less stack than 
this.*/ 
                 ( void * ) pcTextForTask1, /* Pass the text to be printed into 
                                               the task using the task parameter. 
*/ 
                 1,                         /* This task will run at priority 1. 
*/ 
                 NULL );                    /* The task handle is not used in 
                                               this example. */

/* 
     * Create the other task in exactly the same way. Note this time that 
     * multiple tasks are being created from the SAME task implementation 
     * (vTaskFunction). Only the value passed in the parameter is different. 
     * Two instances of the same task definition are being created. 
     */ 
    xTaskCreate( vTaskFunction, 
                 "Task 2", 
                 1000, 
                 ( void * ) pcTextForTask2, 
                 1, 
                 NULL ); 
    /* Start the scheduler so the tasks start executing. */ 
    vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    /* 
     * If all is well main() will not reach here because the scheduler will 
     * now be running the created tasks. If main() does reach here then there 
     * was not enough heap memory to create either the idle or timer tasks 
     * (described later in this book). Chapter 3 provides more information on 
     * heap memory management. 
     */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.9 The main() function for Example 2
The output from Example 4.2 is exactly as per that shown for example 1 in Figure 4.2.
4.5 Task Priorities
The FreeRTOS scheduler always ensures the highest priority task that can run is the task selected to enter the
Running state. Tasks of equal priority are transitioned into and out of the Running state in turn.
The uxPriority parameter of the API function used to create the task gives the task its initial priority. The
vTaskPrioritySet() API function changes a task's priority after its creation.
The application-defined configMAX_PRIORITIES compile-time configuration constant sets the number of
available priorities. Low numeric priority values denote low-priority tasks, with priority 0 being the lowest
priority possible—so valid priorities range from 0 to (configMAX_PRIORITIES – 1). Any number of tasks can
share the same priority.
The FreeRTOS scheduler has two implementations of the algorithm used to select the Running state task and
the maximum allowable value for configMAX_PRIORITIES depends on the implementation used:
4.5.1 Generic Scheduler
The generic scheduler is written in C and can be used with all FreeRTOS architecture ports. It does not impose
an upper limit on configMAX_PRIORITEIS. In general, it is advisable to minimize configMAX_PRIORITIES

because more values require more RAM and will result in a longer worst-case execution time.
4.5.2 Architecture-Optimized Scheduler
Architecture optimized implementations are written in architecture-specific assembly code and are more
performant than the generic c implementation, and the worst-case execution time is the same for all
configMAX_PRIORITIES values.
The architecture optimized implementation imposes a maximum value for configMAX_PRIORITIES of 32 on
32-bit architectures and 64 on 64-bit architectures. As with the generic method, it is advisable to keep
configMAX_PRIORITIES at the lowest value practical because higher values require more RAM.
Set configUSE_PORT_optimized_TASK_SELECTION to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h to use the architecture
optimized implementation, or 0 to use the generic implementation. Not all FreeRTOS ports have an
architecture optimized implementation. Those that do default configUSE_PORT_optimized_TASK_SELECTION
to 1 if it is left undefined. Those that do not, default configUSE_PORT_optimized_TASK_SELECTION to 0 if it
is left undefined.
4.6 Time Measurement and the Tick Interrupt
Section 4.12, Scheduling Algorithms, describes an optional feature called 'time slicing'. Time slicing was used in
the examples presented so far, and is the behavior observed in the output they produced. In the examples,
both tasks were created at the same priority, and both tasks were always able to run. Therefore, each task
executed for a 'time slice', entering the Running state at the start of a time slice, and exiting the Running state
at the end of a time slice. In Figure 4.3, the time between t1 and t2 equals a single time slice.
The scheduler executes at the end of each time slice to select the next task to run[^5]. A periodic interrupt,
called the 'tick interrupt', is used for this purpose. The configTICK_RATE_HZ compile-time configuration
constant sets the frequency of the tick interrupt, and so also the length of each time slice. For example, setting
configTICK_RATE_HZ to 100 (Hz) results in each time slice lasting 10 milliseconds. The time between two tick
interrupts is called the 'tick period'—so one time slice equals one tick period.
[^5]: It is important to note that the end of a time slice is not the only place that the scheduler can select a new
task to run. As we will demonstrate throughout this book, the scheduler will also select a new task to run
immediately after the currently executing task enters the Blocked state, or when an interrupt moves a higher
priority task into the Ready state.
Figure 4.4 expands on Figure 4.3 to also show the execution of the scheduler. In Figure 4.4, the top line shows
when the scheduler is executing, and the thin arrows show the sequence of execution from a task to the tick
interrupt, then from the tick interrupt back to a different task.
The optimal value for configTICK_RATE_HZ depends on the application, although a value of 100 is typical.

Figure 4.4 The execution sequence expanded to show the tick interrupt executing
FreeRTOS API calls specify time in multiples of tick periods, often referred to simply as 'ticks'. The
pdMS_TO_TICKS() macro converts a time specified in milliseconds into a time specified in ticks. The resolution
available depends on the defined tick frequency, and pdMS_TO_TICKS() cannot be used if the tick frequency is
above 1KHz (if configTICK_RATE_HZ is greater than 1000). Listing 4.10 shows how to use pdMS_TO_TICKS()
to convert a time specified as 200 milliseconds into an equivalent time specified in ticks.
/* 
 * pdMS_TO_TICKS() takes a time in milliseconds as its only parameter, 
 * and evaluates to the equivalent time in tick periods. This example shows 
 * xTimeInTicks being set to the number of tick periods that are equivalent 
 * to 200 milliseconds. 
 */ 
TickType_t xTimeInTicks = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 200 ); 
Listing 4.10 Using the pdMS_TO_TICKS() macro to convert 200 milliseconds into an equivalent time in tick
periods
Using pdMS_TO_TICKS() to specify times in milliseconds, rather than directly as ticks, ensures times specified
within the application do not change if the tick frequency is changed.

The 'tick count' is the total number of tick interrupts that have occurred since the scheduler started, assuming
the tick count has not overflowed. User applications do not have to consider overflows when specifying delay
periods, as FreeRTOS manages time consistency internally.
Section 4.12: Scheduling Algorithms describes configuration constants which affect when the scheduler will
select a new task to run and when a tick interrupt will execute.
Example 4.3 Experimenting with priorities
The scheduler will always ensure the highest priority task that can run is the task selected to enter the Running
state. The examples so far created two tasks at the same priority, so both entered and exited the Running state
in turn. This example looks at what happens when the tasks have different priorities. Listing 4.11 shows the
code used to create the tasks, the first with priority 1, and the second with priority 2. The single function that
implements both tasks has not changed; it still periodically prints a string, using a null loop to create a delay.
/* 
 * Define the strings that will be passed in as the task parameters. 
 * These are defined const and not on the stack to ensure they remain valid 
 * when the tasks are executing. 
 */
static const char * pcTextForTask1 = "Task 1 is running"; 
static const char * pcTextForTask2 = "Task 2 is running"; 
int main( void )
{ 
    /* Create the first task with a priority of 1. */ 
    xTaskCreate( vTaskFunction,             /* Task Function    */ 
                 "Task 1",                  /* Task Name        */ 
                 1000,                      /* Task Stack Depth */ 
                 ( void * ) pcTextForTask1, /* Task Parameter   */ 
                 1,                         /* Task Priority    */ 
                 NULL ); 
    /* Create the second task at a higher priority of 2. */ 
    xTaskCreate( vTaskFunction,             /* Task Function    */ 
                 "Task 2",                  /* Task Name        */ 
                 1000,                      /* Task Stack Depth */ 
                 ( void * ) pcTextForTask2, /* Task Parameter   */ 
                 2,                         /* Task Priority    */ 
                 NULL ); 
    /* Start the scheduler so the tasks start executing. */ 
    vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    /* Will not reach here. */ 
    return 0; 
} 
Listing 4.11 Creating two tasks at different priorities

Figure 4.5 shows the output produced by Example 4.3.
The scheduler will always select the highest priority task that can run. Task 2 has a higher priority than Task 1
and can always run; therefore, the scheduler always selects Task 2, and Task 1 never executes. Task 1 is said to
be 'starved' of processing time by Task 2—it can't print its string because it is never in the Running state.
C:\Temp>rtosdemo 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Figure 4.5 Running both tasks at different priorities
Task 2 can always run because it never has to wait for anything—it is either cycling around a null loop or
printing to the terminal.

Figure 4.6 The execution pattern when one task has a higher priority than the other from Example 4.3
4.7 Expanding the Not Running State
So far, the created tasks have always had processing to perform and have never had to wait for anything—and
since they never had to wait for anything, they were always able to enter the Running state. Such 'continuous
processing' tasks have limited usefulness because they can only be created at the very lowest priority. If they
run at any other priority, they will prevent tasks of lower priority from ever running at all.
To make these tasks useful, they must be re-written to be event-driven. An event-driven task only has work
(processing) to perform after an event triggers it and cannot enter the Running state before that time. The
scheduler always selects the highest priority task that can run. If a high-priority task cannot be selected
because it is waiting for an event, the scheduler must, instead, select a lower-priority task that can run.
Therefore, writing event-driven tasks means tasks can be created at different priorities without the highest
priority tasks starving all the lower priority tasks of processing time.
4.7.1 The Blocked State
A task waiting for an event is said to be in the 'Blocked' state, a sub-state of the Not Running state.
Tasks can enter the Blocked state to wait for two different types of events:
1. Temporal (time-related) events— these events occur either when a delay period expires or an absolute
time is reached. For example, a task may enter the Blocked state to wait for 10 milliseconds to pass.
2. Synchronization events— these events originate from another task or interrupt. For example, a task may
enter the Blocked state to wait for data to arrive on a queue. Synchronization events cover a broad range
of event types.

FreeRTOS queues, binary semaphores, counting semaphores, mutexes, recursive mutexes, event groups, stream
buffers, message buffers, and direct to task notifications can all create synchronization events. Later chapters
cover most of these features.
A task can block on a synchronization event with a timeout, effectively blocking on both types of event
simultaneously. For example, a task may choose to wait for a maximum of 10 milliseconds for data to arrive on
a queue. The task will leave the Blocked state if data arrives within 10 milliseconds or if 10 milliseconds pass
without data arriving.
4.7.2 The Suspended State
Suspended is also a sub-state of Not Running. Tasks in the Suspended state are not available to the scheduler.
The only way to enter the Suspended state is through a call to the vTaskSuspend() API function, and the only
way out is through a call to the vTaskResume() or xTaskResumeFromISR() API functions. Most applications
do not use the Suspended state.
4.7.3 The Ready State
Tasks that are in the Not Running state and are not Blocked or Suspended are said to be in the Ready state.
They can run, and are therefore 'ready' to run, but are not currently in the Running state.
4.7.4 Completing the State Transition Diagram
Figure 4.7 expands on the simplified state diagram to include all of the Not Running sub-states described in
this section. The tasks created in the examples so far have not used the Blocked or Suspended states. They have
only transitioned between the Ready state and the Running state as shown by the bold lines in Figure 4.7.

task state machine
Example 4.4 *Using the Blocked state to create a delay
 Figure 4.7 Full
All the tasks created in the examples presented so far have been 'periodic'—they have delayed for a period
and then printed out their string, before delaying once more, and so on. The delay has been generated very
crudely using a null loop—the task polled an incrementing loop counter until it reached a fixed value. Example
4.3 clearly demonstrated the disadvantage of this method. The higher priority task remained in the Running
state while it executed the null loop, 'starving' the lower priority task of any processing time.
There are several other disadvantages to any form of polling, not least of which is its inefficiency. During
polling, the task does not really have any work to do, but it still uses the maximum processing time, and so
wastes processor cycles. Example 4.4 corrects this behavior by replacing the polling null loop with a call to the

vTaskDelay() API function, whose prototype is shown in Listing 4.12. The new task definition is shown in
Listing 4.13. Note that the vTaskDelay() API function is available only when INCLUDE_vTaskDelay is set to 1
in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
vTaskDelay() places the calling task into the Blocked state for a fixed number of tick interrupts. The task does
not use any processing time while it is in the Blocked state, so the task only uses processing time when there is
actually work to be done.
void vTaskDelay( TickType_t xTicksToDelay ); 
Listing 4.12 The vTaskDelay() API function prototype
vTaskDelay parameters:
xTicksToDelay
The number of tick interrupts that the calling task will remain in the Blocked state before being
transitioned back into the Ready state.
For example, if a task called vTaskDelay( 100 ) when the tick count was 10,000, then it would
immediately enter the Blocked state, and remain in the Blocked state until the tick count reached 10,100.
The macro pdMS_TO_TICKS() can be used to convert a time specified in milliseconds into a time
specified in ticks. For example, calling vTaskDelay( pdMS_TO_TICKS( 100 ) ) results in the calling
task remaining in the Blocked state for 100 milliseconds.
void vTaskFunction( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    char * pcTaskName; 
    const TickType_t xDelay250ms = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 250 ); 
    /* 
     * The string to print out is passed in via the parameter. Cast this to a 
     * character pointer. 
     */ 
    pcTaskName = ( char * ) pvParameters; 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented in an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Print out the name of this task. */ 
        vPrintLine( pcTaskName ); 
        /* 
         * Delay for a period. This time a call to vTaskDelay() is used which 
         * places the task into the Blocked state until the delay period has 
         * expired. The parameter takes a time specified in 'ticks', and the 
         * pdMS_TO_TICKS() macro is used (where the xDelay250ms constant is 
         * declared) to convert 250 milliseconds into an equivalent time in 
         * ticks.

*/ 
        vTaskDelay( xDelay250ms ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.13 The source code for the example task after replacing the null loop delay with a call to vTaskDelay()
Even though the two tasks are still being created at different priorities, both will now run. The output of
Example 4.4, which is shown in Figure 4.8, confirms the expected behavior.
C:\Temp>rtosdemo 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Task 2 is running 
Task 1 is running 
Figure 4.8 The output produced when Example 4.4 is executed
The execution sequence shown in Figure 4.9 explains why both tasks run, even though they are created at
different priorities. The execution of the scheduler itself is omitted for simplicity.
The idle task is created automatically when the scheduler is started, to ensure there is always at least one task
that can run (at least one task in the Ready state). Section 4.8: The Idle Task and the Idle Task Hook describes
the Idle task in more detail.

Figure 4.9 The execution sequence when the tasks use vTaskDelay() in place of the null loop
Only the implementation of the two tasks has changed, not their functionality. Comparing Figure 4.9 with
Figure 4.4 demonstrates clearly that this functionality is being achieved in a much more efficient manner.
Figure 4.4 shows the execution pattern when the tasks use a null loop to create a delay and so are always able
to run. As a result, they use one hundred percent of the available processor time between them. Figure 4.9
shows the execution pattern when the tasks enter the Blocked state for the entirety of their delay period. They
use processor time only when they actually have work that needs to be performed (in this case simply a
message to be printed out), and as a result only use a tiny fraction of the available processing time.
In the scenario shown in Figure 4.9, each time the tasks leave the Blocked state they execute for a fraction of a
tick period before re-entering the Blocked state. Most of the time there are no application tasks that can run
(no application tasks in the Ready state) and, therefore, no application tasks that can be selected to enter the
Running state. While this is the case, the idle task runs. The amount of processing time allocated to the idle is a
measure of the spare processing capacity in the system. Using an RTOS can significantly increase the spare
processing capacity simply by allowing an application to be completely event driven.
The bold lines in Figure 4.10 show the transitions performed by the tasks in Example 4.4, with each task now
transitioning through the Blocked state before being returned to the Ready state.

Figure 4.10 Bold lines indicate the state transitions performed by the tasks in Example 4.4
4.7.5 The vTaskDelayUntil() API Function
vTaskDelayUntil() is similar to vTaskDelay(). As just demonstrated, the vTaskDelay() parameter
specifies the number of tick interrupts that should occur between a task calling vTaskDelay(), and the same
task once again transitioning out of the Blocked state. The length of time the task remains in the blocked state
is specified by the vTaskDelay() parameter, but the time at which the task leaves the blocked state is relative
to the time at which vTaskDelay() was called.

The parameters to vTaskDelayUntil() specify, instead, the exact tick count value at which the calling task
should be moved from the Blocked state into the Ready state. vTaskDelayUntil() is the API function to use
when a fixed execution period is required (where you want your task to execute periodically with a fixed
frequency), as the time at which the calling task is unblocked is absolute, rather than relative to when the
function was called (as is the case with vTaskDelay()).
void vTaskDelayUntil( TickType_t * pxPreviousWakeTime, 
                      TickType_t xTimeIncrement ); 
Listing 4.14 vTaskDelayUntil() API function prototype
vTaskDelayUntil() parameters
pxPreviousWakeTime
This parameter is named on the assumption that vTaskDelayUntil() is being used to implement a
task that executes periodically and with a fixed frequency. In this case, pxPreviousWakeTime holds the
time at which the task last left the Blocked state (was 'woken' up). This time is used as a reference point
to calculate the time at which the task should next leave the Blocked state.
The variable pointed to by pxPreviousWakeTime is updated automatically in the vTaskDelayUntil()
function; it would not normally be modified by the application code, but must be initialized to the
current tick count before its first use. Listing 4.15 demonstrates how to initialise the variable.
xTimeIncrement
This parameter is also named on the assumption that vTaskDelayUntil() is being used to implement
a task that executes periodically and with a fixed frequency that is set by the xTimeIncrement value.
xTimeIncrement is specified in 'ticks'. The macro pdMS_TO_TICKS() can be used to convert a time
specified in milliseconds into a time specified in ticks.
Example 4.5 Converting the example tasks to use vTaskDelayUntil()
The two tasks created in Example 4.4 are periodic tasks, but using vTaskDelay() does not guarantee that the
frequency at which they run is fixed, as the time at which the tasks leave the Blocked state is relative to when
they call vTaskDelay(). Converting the tasks to use vTaskDelayUntil() instead of vTaskDelay() solves
this potential problem.
void vTaskFunction( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    char * pcTaskName; 
    TickType_t xLastWakeTime; 
    /* 
     * The string to print out is passed in via the parameter. Cast this to a 
     * character pointer. 
     */

pcTaskName = ( char * ) pvParameters; 
    /* 
     * The xLastWakeTime variable needs to be initialized with the current tick 
     * count. Note that this is the only time the variable is written to 
     * explicitly. After this xLastWakeTime is automatically updated within 
     * vTaskDelayUntil(). 
     */ 
    xLastWakeTime = xTaskGetTickCount(); 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented in an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Print out the name of this task. */ 
        vPrintLine( pcTaskName ); 
        /* 
         * This task should execute every 250 milliseconds exactly. As per 
         * the vTaskDelay() function, time is measured in ticks, and the 
         * pdMS_TO_TICKS() macro is used to convert milliseconds into ticks. 
         * xLastWakeTime is automatically updated within vTaskDelayUntil(), so 
         * is not explicitly updated by the task. 
         */ 
        vTaskDelayUntil( &xLastWakeTime, pdMS_TO_TICKS( 250 ) ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.15 The implementation of the example task using vTaskDelayUntil()
The output produced by Example 4.5 is exactly as per that shown for Example 4.4 in Figure 4.8.
Example 4.6 Combining blocking and non-blocking tasks
The previous examples examined the behavior of both polling and blocking tasks in isolation. This example re-
enforces what we have already said regarding the expected system behavior and demonstrates the execution
sequence when the two schemes are combined, as follows:
1. Two tasks are created at priority 1. These do nothing other than continuously print out a string.
These tasks never make API function calls that could cause them to enter the Blocked state, so are
always in either the Ready or the Running state. Tasks of this nature are called 'continuous processing'
tasks, as they always have work to do (albeit rather trivial work, in this case). Listing 4.16 shows the
source code for the continuous processing tasks.
2. A third task is then created at priority 2, which is above the priority of the other two tasks. The third task
also just prints out a string, but this time periodically, so it uses the vTaskDelayUntil() API function to
place itself into the Blocked state between each print iteration.
Listing 4.17 shows the source code of the periodic task.

void vContinuousProcessingTask( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    char * pcTaskName; 
    /* 
     * The string to print out is passed in via the parameter. Cast this to a 
     * character pointer. 
     */ 
    pcTaskName = ( char * ) pvParameters; 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented in an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* 
         * Print out the name of this task. This task just does this repeatedly 
         * without ever blocking or delaying. 
         */ 
        vPrintLine( pcTaskName ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.16 The continuous processing task used in Example 4.6
void vPeriodicTask( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    TickType_t xLastWakeTime; 
    const TickType_t xDelay3ms = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 3 ); 
    /* 
     * The xLastWakeTime variable needs to be initialized with the current tick 
     * count. Note that this is the only time the variable is explicitly 
     * written to. After this xLastWakeTime is managed automatically by the 
     * vTaskDelayUntil() API function. 
     */ 
    xLastWakeTime = xTaskGetTickCount(); 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented in an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Print out the name of this task. */ 
        vPrintLine( "Periodic task is running" ); 
        /* 
         * The task should execute every 3 milliseconds exactly – see the 
         * declaration of xDelay3ms in this function. 
         */ 
        vTaskDelayUntil( &xLastWakeTime, xDelay3ms ); 
    } 
}

Listing 4.17 The periodic task used in Example 4.6
Figure 4.11 shows the output produced by Example 4.6, with an explanation of the observed behavior given by
the execution sequence shown in Figure 4.12.
Continuous task 2 running 
Continuous task 2 running 
Periodic task is running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 2 running 
Continuous task 2 running 
Continuous task 2 running 
Continuous task 2 running 
Continuous task 2 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Continuous task 1 running 
Periodic task is running 
Continuous task 2 running 
Continuous task 2 running 
Figure 4.11 The output produced when Example 4.6 is executed

Figure 4.12 The execution pattern of Example 4.6
4.8 The Idle Task and the Idle Task Hook
The tasks created in Example 4.4 spend most of their time in the Blocked state. While in this state, they are not
able to run, so they cannot be selected by the scheduler.
There must always be at least one task that can enter the Running state[^6]. To ensure this is the case, the
scheduler automatically creates an Idle task when vTaskStartScheduler() is called. The idle task does very
little more than sit in a loop, so, like the tasks in the first examples, it is always able to run.
[^6]: This is the case even when the special low power features of FreeRTOS are being used, in which case the
microcontroller on which FreeRTOS is executing will be placed into a low power mode if none of the tasks
created by the application are able to execute.
The idle task has the lowest possible priority (priority zero), to ensure it never prevents a higher priority
application task from entering the Running state. However, there is nothing to prevent application designers
from creating tasks at, and therefore that share, the idle task priority, if desired. The
configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD compile time configuration constant in FreeRTOSConfig.h can be used to
prevent the Idle task from consuming processing time that would be more productively allocated to

applications tasks that also have a priority of 0. Section 4.12, Scheduling Algorithms, describes
configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD.
Running at the lowest priority ensures the Idle task is transitioned out of the Running state as soon as a higher
priority task enters the Ready state. This can be seen at time tn in Figure 4.9, where the Idle task is immediately
swapped out to allow Task 2 to execute at the instant Task 2 leaves the Blocked state. Task 2 is said to have
preempted the idle task. Preemption occurs automatically, and without the knowledge of the task being
preempted.
Note: If a task uses the vTaskDelete() API function to delete itself then it is essential that the Idle task is
not starved of processing time. This is because the Idle task is responsible for cleaning up kernel resources
used by tasks that deleted themselves.
4.8.1 Idle Task Hook Functions
It is possible to add application specific functionality directly into the idle task through the use of an idle hook
(or idle callback) function, which is a function that is called automatically by the idle task once per iteration of
the idle task loop.
Common uses for the Idle task hook include:
Executing low priority, background, or continuous processing functionality without the RAM overhead of
creating application tasks for the purpose.
Measuring the amount of spare processing capacity. (The idle task will run only when all higher priority
application tasks have no work to perform; so measuring the amount of processing time allocated to the
idle task provides a clear indication of spare processing time.)
Placing the processor into a low power mode, providing an easy and automatic method of saving power
whenever there is no application processing to be performed (although the achievable power saving is
less than that achieved by tick-less idle mode).
4.8.2 Limitations on the Implementation of Idle Task Hook Functions
Idle task hook functions must adhere to the following rules.
An Idle task hook function must never attempt to block or suspend itself.
Note: Blocking the idle task in any way could cause a scenario where no tasks are available to enter the
Running state.
If an application task uses the vTaskDelete() API function to delete itself, then the Idle task hook must
always return to its caller within a reasonable time period. This is because the Idle task is responsible for
cleaning up kernel resources allocated to tasks that delete themselves. If the idle task remains
permanently in the Idle hook function, then this clean-up cannot occur.
Idle task hook functions must have the name and prototype shown in Listing 4.18.
void vApplicationIdleHook( void );

Listing 4.18 The idle task hook function name and prototype
Example 4.7 *Defining an idle task hook function
The use of blocking vTaskDelay() API calls in Example 4.4 created a lot of idle time, that is, time when the
Idle task executes because both application tasks are in the Blocked state. Example 4.7 makes use of this idle
time through the addition of an Idle hook function, the source for which is shown in Listing 4.19.
/* Declare a variable that will be incremented by the hook function.  */
volatile unsigned long ulIdleCycleCount = 0UL; 
/* 
 * Idle hook functions MUST be called vApplicationIdleHook(), take no 
 * parameters, and return void. 
 */
void vApplicationIdleHook( void )
{ 
    /* This hook function does nothing but increment a counter. */ 
    ulIdleCycleCount++; 
} 
Listing 4.19 A very simple Idle hook function
configUSE_IDLE_HOOK must be set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h for the idle hook function to get called.
The function that implements the created tasks is modified slightly to print out the ulIdleCycleCount value,
as shown in Listing 4.20.
void vTaskFunction( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    char * pcTaskName; 
    const TickType_t xDelay250ms = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 250 ); 
    /* 
     * The string to print out is passed in via the parameter. Cast this to 
     * a character pointer. 
     */ 
    pcTaskName = ( char * ) pvParameters; 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented in an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* 
         * Print out the name of this task AND the number of times 
         * ulIdleCycleCount has been incremented. 
         */ 
        vPrintLineAndNumber( pcTaskName, ulIdleCycleCount ); 
        /* Delay for a period of 250 milliseconds. */ 
        vTaskDelay( xDelay250ms );

} 
} 
Listing 4.20 The source code for the example task now prints out the ulIdleCycleCount value
Figure 4.13 shows the output produced by Example 4.7. It can be seen that the idle task hook function
executes approximately 4 million times between each iteration of the application tasks (the number of
iterations depends on the hardware speed).
C:\Temp>rtosdemo 
Task 2 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 0 
Task 1 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 0 
Task 2 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 3869504 
Task 1 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 3869504 
Task 2 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 8564623 
Task 1 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 8564623 
Task 2 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 13181489 
Task 1 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 13181489 
Task 2 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 17838406 
Task 1 is running 
ulIdleCycleCount = 17838406 
Task 2 is running 
Figure 4.13 The output produced when Example 4.7 is executed
4.9 Changing the Priority of a Task
4.9.1 The vTaskPrioritySet() API Function
The vTaskPrioritySet() API function changes the priority of a task after the scheduler has been started. The
vTaskPrioritySet() API function is only available when INCLUDE_vTaskPrioritySet is set to 1 in
FreeRTOSConfig.h.
void vTaskPrioritySet( TaskHandle_t xTask, 
                       UBaseType_t uxNewPriority ); 
Listing 4.21 The vTaskPrioritySet() API function prototype

vTaskPrioritySet() parameters
pxTask
The handle of the task whose priority is being modified (the subject task). See the pxCreatedTask
parameter of the xTaskCreate() API function, or the return value of the xTaskCreateStatic() API
function, for information on obtaining handles to tasks.
A task can change its own priority by passing NULL in place of a valid task handle.
uxNewPriority
The priority to which the subject task is to be set. This is capped automatically to the maximum available
priority of (configMAX_PRIORITIES – 1), where configMAX_PRIORITIES is a compile time constant
set in the FreeRTOSConfig.h header file.
4.9.2 The uxTaskPriorityGet() API Function
The uxTaskPriorityGet() API function returns the priority of a task. The uxTaskPriorityGet() API
function is only available when INCLUDE_uxTaskPriorityGet is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
UBaseType_t uxTaskPriorityGet( TaskHandle_t xTask ); 
Listing 4.22 The uxTaskPriorityGet() API function prototype
uxTaskPriorityGet() parameters and return value
pxTask
The handle of the task whose priority is being queried (the subject task). See the pxCreatedTask
parameter of the xTaskCreate() API function for information on how to obtain handles to tasks.
A task can query its own priority by passing NULL in place of a valid task handle.
Return value
The priority currently assigned to the task being queried.
Example 4.8 Changing task priorities
The scheduler always selects the highest Ready state task as the task to enter the Running state. Example 4.8
demonstrates this by using the vTaskPrioritySet() API function to change the priority of two tasks relative
to each other.
Example 4.8 creates two tasks at two different priorities. Neither task makes any API function calls that could
cause it to enter the Blocked state, so both are always in either the Ready state or the Running state. Therefore,
the task with the highest relative priority will always be the task selected by the scheduler to be in the Running
state.
Example 4.8 behaves as follows:

1. Task 1 (Listing 4.23) is created with the highest priority, so it is guaranteed to run first. Task 1 prints out a
couple of strings before raising the priority of Task 2 (Listing 4.24) above its own priority.
2. Task 2 starts to run (enters the Running state) as soon as it has the highest relative priority. Only one task
can be in the Running state at any one time, so when Task 2 is in the Running state, Task 1 is in the
Ready state.
3. Task 2 prints out a message before setting its own priority back down to below that of Task 1.
4. When Task 2 sets its priority back down, then Task 1 is once again the highest priority task, so Task 1 re-
enters the Running state, forcing Task 2 back into the Ready state.
void vTask1( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    UBaseType_t uxPriority; 
    /* 
     * This task will always run before Task 2 as it is created with the higher 
     * priority. Neither Task 1 nor Task 2 ever block so both will always be in 
     * either the Running or the Ready state. 
     */ 
    /* 
     * Query the priority at which this task is running - passing in NULL means 
     * "return the calling task's priority". 
     */ 
    uxPriority = uxTaskPriorityGet( NULL ); 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Print out the name of this task. */ 
        vPrintLine( "Task 1 is running" ); 
        /* 
         * Setting the Task 2 priority above the Task 1 priority will cause 
         * Task 2 to immediately start running (as then Task 2 will have the 
         * higher priority of the two created tasks). Note the use of the 
         * handle to task 2 (xTask2Handle) in the call to vTaskPrioritySet(). 
         * Listing 4.25 shows how the handle was obtained. 
         */ 
        vPrintLine( "About to raise the Task 2 priority" ); 
        vTaskPrioritySet( xTask2Handle, ( uxPriority + 1 ) ); 
        /* 
         * Task 1 will only run when it has a priority higher than Task 2. 
         * Therefore, for this task to reach this point, Task 2 must already 
         * have executed and set its priority back down to below the priority 
         * of this task. 
         */ 
    } 
}

Listing 4.23 The implementation of Task 1 in Example 4.8
void vTask2( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    UBaseType_t uxPriority; 
    /* 
     * Task 1 will always run before this task as Task 1 is created with the 
     * higher priority. Neither Task 1 nor Task 2 ever block so will always be 
     * in either the Running or the Ready state. 
     * 
     * Query the priority at which this task is running - passing in NULL means 
     * "return the calling task's priority". 
     */ 
    uxPriority = uxTaskPriorityGet( NULL ); 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* 
         * For this task to reach this point Task 1 must have already run and 
         * set the priority of this task higher than its own. 
         */ 
         /* Print out the name of this task. */ 
        vPrintLine( "Task 2 is running" ); 
        /* 
         * Set the priority of this task back down to its original value. 
         * Passing in NULL as the task handle means "change the priority of the 
         * calling task". Setting the priority below that of Task 1 will cause 
         * Task 1 to immediately start running again – preempting this task. 
         */ 
        vPrintLine( "About to lower the Task 2 priority" ); 
        vTaskPrioritySet( NULL, ( uxPriority - 2 ) ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.24 The implementation of Task 2 in Example 4.8
Each task can both query and set its own priority by using NULL in place of a valid task handle. A task handle is
only required when a task wishes to reference a task other than itself, such as when Task 1 changes the priority
of Task 2. To allow Task 1 to do this, the Task 2 handle is obtained and saved when Task 2 is created, as
highlighted in the comments in Listing 4.25.
/* Declare a variable that is used to hold the handle of Task 2. */ 
TaskHandle_t xTask2Handle = NULL; 
int main( void )
{ 
    /*

* Create the first task at priority 2. The task parameter is not used 
     * and set to NULL. The task handle is also not used so is also set to 
     * NULL. 
     */ 
    xTaskCreate( vTask1, "Task 1", 1000, NULL, 2, NULL ); 
    /* The task is created at priority 2 ______^. */ 
    /* 
     * Create the second task at priority 1 - which is lower than the priority 
     * given to Task 1. Again the task parameter is not used so is set to NULL- 
     * BUT this time the task handle is required so the address of xTask2Handle 
     * is passed in the last parameter. 
     */ 
    xTaskCreate( vTask2, "Task 2", 1000, NULL, 1, &xTask2Handle ); 
    /* The task handle is the last parameter _____^^^^^^^^^^^^^ */ 
    /* Start the scheduler so the tasks start executing. */ 
    vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    /* 
     * If all is well main() will not reach here because the scheduler will 
     * now be running the created tasks. If main() does reach here then there 
     * was not enough heap memory to create either the idle or timer tasks 
     * (described later in this book). Chapter 2 provides more information on 
     * heap memory management. 
     */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.25 The implementation of main() for Example 4.8
Figure 4.14 demonstrates the sequence in which the tasks in Example 4.8 execute, and the resultant output is
shown in Figure 4.15.

task execution when running Example 4.8
 Figure 4.14 The sequence of
Task1 is running 
About to raise the Task2 priority 
Task2 is running 
About to lower the Task2 priority 
Task1 is running 
About to raise the Task2 priority 
Task2 is running 
About to lower the Task2 priority 
Task1 is running 
About to raise the Task2 priority 
Task2 is running 
About to lower the Task2 priority 
Task1 is running 
Figure 4.15 The output produced when Example 4.8 is executed
4.10 Deleting a Task

4.10.1 The vTaskDelete() API Function
The vTaskDelete() API function deletes a task. The vTaskDelete() API function is only available when
INCLUDE_vTaskDelete is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
It is not good practice to continuously create and delete tasks at run time, so consider other design options,
such as re-using tasks, if you find yourself needing this function.
Deleted tasks no longer exist and cannot enter the Running state again.
If a task that was created using dynamic memory allocation later deletes itself, the Idle task is responsible for
freeing the memory allocated for use, such as the deleted task's data structure and stack. So it is important
that applications do not completely starve the Idle task of all processing time when this is the case.
Note: Only memory allocated to a task by the kernel itself is freed automatically when the task is deleted.
Any memory or other resource that was allocated during the implementation of the task must be freed
explicitly if it is no longer needed.
void vTaskDelete( TaskHandle_t xTaskToDelete ); 
Listing 4.26 The vTaskDelete() API function prototype
vTaskDelete() parameters
pxTaskToDelete
The handle of the task that is to be deleted (the subject task). See the pxCreatedTask parameter of the
xTaskCreate() API function, and the return value of the xTaskCreateStatic() API function, for
information on obtaining handles to tasks.
A task can delete itself by passing NULL in place of a valid task handle.
Example 4.9 Deleting tasks
This is a very simple example that behaves as follows.
1. Task 1 is created by main() with priority 1. When it runs, it creates Task 2 at priority 2. Task 2 is now the
highest priority task, so it starts to execute immediately. Listing 4.27 shows the source code for main().
Listing 4.28 shows the source code for Task 1.
2. Task 2 does nothing other than delete itself. It could delete itself by passing NULL to vTaskDelete()
but instead, for demonstration purposes, it uses its own task handle. Listing 4.29 shows the source code
for Task 2.
3. When Task 2 has been deleted, Task 1 is again the highest priority task, so it continues executing—at
which point it calls vTaskDelay() to block for a short period.
4. The Idle task executes while Task 1 is in the blocked state and frees the memory that was allocated to
the now deleted Task 2.

5. When Task 1 leaves the blocked state it again becomes the highest priority Ready state task and so
preempts the Idle task. When it enters the Running state it creates Task 2 again, and so it goes on.
int main( void )
{ 
    /* Create the first task at priority 1. */ 
    xTaskCreate( vTask1, "Task 1", 1000, NULL, 1, NULL ); 
    /* Start the scheduler so the task starts executing. */ 
    vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    /* main() should never reach here as the scheduler has been started. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.27 The implementation of main() for Example 4.9
TaskHandle_t xTask2Handle = NULL; 
void vTask1( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    const TickType_t xDelay100ms = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 100UL ); 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Print out the name of this task. */ 
        vPrintLine( "Task 1 is running" ); 
        /* 
         * Create task 2 at a higher priority. 
         * Pass the address of xTask2Handle as the pxCreatedTask parameter so 
         * that xTaskCreate write the resulting task handle to that variable. 
         */ 
        xTaskCreate( vTask2, "Task 2", 1000, NULL, 2, &xTask2Handle ); 
        /* 
         * Task 2 has/had the higher priority. For Task 1 to reach here, Task 2 
         * must have already executed and deleted itself. 
         */ 
        vTaskDelay( xDelay100ms ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 4.28 The implementation of Task 1 for Example 4.9

void vTask2( void * pvParameters )
{ 
    /* 
     * Task 2 immediately deletes itself upon starting. 
     * To do this it could call vTaskDelete() using NULL as the parameter. 
     * For demonstration purposes, it instead calls vTaskDelete() with its own 
     * task handle. 
     */ 
    vPrintLine( "Task 2 is running and about to delete itself" ); 
    vTaskDelete( xTask2Handle ); 
} 
Listing 4.29 The implementation of Task 2 for Example 4.9
C:\Temp>rtosdemo 
Task1 is running 
Task2 is running and about to delete itself 
Task1 is running 
Task2 is running and about to delete itself 
Task1 is running 
Task2 is running and about to delete itself 
Task1 is running 
Task2 is running and about to delete itself 
Task1 is running 
Task2 is running and about to delete itself 
Task1 is running 
Task2 is running and about to delete itself 
Task1 is running 
Task2 is running and about to delete itself 
Task1 is running 
Task2 is running and about to delete itself 
Figure 4.16 The output produced when Example 4.9 is executed

Figure 4.17 The execution sequence for Example 4.9
4.11 Thread Local Storage and Reentrancy
Thread Local Storage allows an application developer to store arbitrary data in the Task Control Block of each
task. This feature is most commonly used to store data which would normally be stored in a global variable by
non-reentrant functions.
A reentrant function is a function which can safely run from multiple threads without any side effects. When
non-reentrant functions are used in a multi-threaded environment without thread local storage, special care
must be taken to check the out of band results of these function calls from within a critical section. Excessive
use of critical sections degrades RTOS performance, so Thread Local Storage is often preferred over the use of
critical sections.
By far the most common use of Thread Local Storage is the errno global used in the ISO C standard used by
the C standard library and POSIX systems. The errno global is used to provide an extended result or error
code for common standard library functions such as strtof and strtol.
4.11.1 C Runtime Thread Local Storage Implementations
Most embedded libc implementations provide APIs to ensure that non-reentrant functions can work correctly
in a multi-threaded environment. FreeRTOS includes support for the reentrancy APIs of two commonly used
open-source libraries: newlib and picolibc. These pre-built C Runtime Thread Local Storage implementations
can be enabled by by defining the respective macro listed below in their project's FreeRTOSConfig.h file.

configUSE_NEWLIB_REENTRANT for newlib
configUSE_PICOLIBC_TLS for picolibc
4.11.2 Custom C Runtime Thread Local Storage
Application developers may implement thread local storage by defining the following macros in their
FreeRTOSConfig.h file:
Define configUSE_C_RUNTIME_TLS_SUPPORT to 1 to enable C Runtime Thread Local Storage support.
Define configTLS_BLOCK_TYPE to the c type which should be used for storing C Runtime Thread Local
Storage data.
Define configINIT_TLS_BLOCK to the c code which should be run when initializing the C Runtime
Thread Local Storage block.
Define configSET_TLS_BLOCK to the c code which should be run when switching in a new task
Define configDEINIT_TLS_BLOCK to the c code which should be run when de-initializing the C Runtime
Thread Local Storage block.
4.11.3 Application Thread Local Storage
In addition to C Runtime Thread Local Storage, application developers may also define a set of application
specific pointers to be included in the task control block. This feature is enabled by setting
configNUM_THREAD_LOCAL_STORAGE_POINTERS to a non-zero number in the project's FreeRTOSConfig.h file.
The vTaskSetThreadLocalStoragePointer and pvTaskGetThreadLocalStoragePointer functions defined
in Listing 4.30 may be used respectively to set and get the value of each thread local storage pointer at
runtime.
void * pvTaskGetThreadLocalStoragePointer( TaskHandle_t xTaskToQuery, 
                                           BaseType_t xIndex ) 
void vTaskSetThreadLocalStoragePointer( TaskHandle_t xTaskToSet, 
                                        BaseType_t xIndex, 
                                        void * pvValue ); 
Listing 4.30 Function prototypes of the Thread Local Storage Pointer API functions
4.12 Scheduling Algorithms
4.12.1 A Recap of Task States and Events
The task that is actually running (using processing time) is in the Running state. On a single core processor
there can only be one task in the Running state at any given time. It is also possible to run FreeRTOS on more
than one core (asymmetric multiprocessing, or AMP), or have FreeRTOS schedule tasks across multiple cores
(symmetric multiprocessing, or SMP). Neither of those scenarios are described here.
Tasks that are not actually running, but are not in either the Blocked state or the Suspended state, are in the
Ready state. Tasks in the Ready state are available to be selected by the scheduler as the task to enter the

Running state. The scheduler will always choose the highest priority Ready state task to enter the Running
state.
Tasks can wait in the Blocked state for an event and they are automatically moved back to the Ready state
when the event occurs. Temporal events occur at a particular time, for example, when a block time expires, and
are normally used to implement periodic or timeout behavior. Synchronization events occur when a task or
interrupt service routine sends information using a task notification, queue, event group, message buffer,
stream buffer, or one of the many types of semaphore. They are generally used to signal asynchronous activity,
such as data arriving at a peripheral.
4.12.2 Selecting the Scheduling Algorithm
The scheduling algorithm is the software routine that decides which Ready state task to transition into the
Running state.
All the examples so far have used the same scheduling algorithm, but the algorithm can be changed using the
configUSE_PREEMPTION and configUSE_TIME_SLICING configuration constants. Both constants are defined
in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
A third configuration constant, configUSE_TICKLESS_IDLE, also affects the scheduling algorithm, as its use
can result in the tick interrupt being turned off completely for extended periods. configUSE_TICKLESS_IDLE
is an advanced option provided specifically for use in applications that must minimize their power
consumption. The descriptions provided in this section assume configUSE_TICKLESS_IDLE is set to 0, which
is the default setting if the constant is left undefined.
In all possible single core configurations the FreeRTOS scheduler selects tasks that share a priority in turn. This
'take it in turn' policy is often referred to as 'Round Robin Scheduling'. A Round Robin scheduling algorithm
does not guarantee time is shared equally between tasks of equal priority, only that Ready state tasks of equal
priority enter the Running state in turn.
Scheduling Algorithm
Prioritized
configUSE_PREEMPTION
configUSE_TIME_SLICING
Preemptive With Time Slicing
Yes
Preemptive Without Time Slicing
Yes
Co-Operative
No
1
1
Any
Table 5 The FreeRTOSConfig.h settings to configure the kernel scheduling algorithms
4.12.3 Prioritized Preemptive Scheduling with Time Slicing
The configuration shown in the Table 5 sets the FreeRTOS scheduler to use a scheduling algorithm called 'Fixed
Priority Preemptive Scheduling with Time Slicing', which is the scheduling algorithm used by most small RTOS
applications, and the algorithm used by all the examples presented in this book so far. The next table provides
a description of the terminology used in the algorithm's name.
An explanation of the terms used to describe the scheduling policy:
Fixed Priority

Scheduling algorithms described as 'Fixed Priority' do not change the priority assigned to the tasks
being scheduled, but also do not prevent the tasks themselves from changing their own priority or that
of other tasks.
Preemptive
Preemptive scheduling algorithms will immediately 'preempt' the Running state task if a task that has a
priority higher than the Running state task enters the Ready state. Being preempted means being
involuntarily moved out of the Running state and into the Ready state (without explicitly yielding or
blocking) to allow a different task to enter the Running state. Task preemption can occur at any time, not
just in the RTOS tick interrupt.
Time Slicing
Time slicing is used to share processing time between tasks of equal priority, even when the tasks do
not explicitly yield or enter the Blocked state. Scheduling algorithms described as using Time Slicing
select a new task to enter the Running state at the end of each time slice if there are other Ready state
tasks that have the same priority as the Running task. A time slice is equal to the time between two
RTOS tick interrupts.
Figure 4.18 and Figure 4.19 demonstrate how tasks are scheduled when a fixed priority preemptive scheduling
with time slicing algorithm is used. Figure 4.18 shows the sequence in which tasks are selected to enter the
Running state when all the tasks in an application have a unique priority. Figure 4.19 shows the sequence in
which tasks are selected to enter the Running state when two tasks in an application share a priority.
Figure 4.18 Execution pattern highlighting task prioritization and preemption in a hypothetical application in
which each task has been assigned a unique priority
Referring to Figure 4.18:
Idle Task

The idle task is running at the lowest priority, so it gets preempted every time a higher priority task
enters the Ready state, for example, at times t3, t5 and t9.
Task 3
Task 3 is an event-driven task that executes with a relatively low priority, but above the Idle priority. It
spends most of its time in the Blocked state waiting for its event of interest, transitioning from the
Blocked state to the Ready state each time the event occurs. All FreeRTOS inter-task communication
mechanisms (task notifications, queues, semaphores, event groups, etc.) can be used to signal events
and unblock tasks in this way.
Events occur at times t3 and t5, and also somewhere between t9 and t12. The events occurring at times
t3 and t5 are processed immediately because, at these times, Task 3 is the highest priority task that is
able to run. The event that occurs somewhere between times t9 and t12 is not processed until t12
because, until then, the higher priority tasks Task 1 and Task 2 are still executing. It is only at time t12
that both Task 1 and Task 2 are in the Blocked state, making Task 3 the highest priority Ready state task.
Task 2
Task 2 is a periodic task that executes at a priority above the priority of Task 3, but below the priority of
Task 1. The task's period interval means Task 2 wants to execute at times t1, t6, and t9.
At time t6, Task 3 is in the Running state, but Task 2 has the higher relative priority so preempts Task 3
and starts executing immediately. Task 2 completes its processing and re-enters the Blocked state at
time t7, at which point Task 3 can re-enter the Running state to complete its processing. Task 3 itself
Blocks at time t8.
Task 1
Task 1 is also an event-driven task. It executes with the highest priority of all, so can preempt any other
task in the system. The only Task 1 event shown occurs at time t10, at which time Task 1 preempts Task 2.
Task 2 can complete its processing only after Task 1 has re-entered the Blocked state at time t11.
Figure 4.19 Execution pattern highlighting task prioritization and time slicing in a hypothetical application in
which two tasks run at the same priority
Referring to Figure 4.19:
The Idle Task and Task 2

The Idle task and Task 2 are both continuous processing tasks, and both have a priority of 0 (the lowest
possible priority). The scheduler only allocates processing time to the priority 0 tasks when there are no
higher priority tasks that are able to run, and shares the time that is allocated to the priority 0 tasks by
time slicing. A new time slice starts on each tick interrupt, which in Figure 4.19 occurs at times t1, t2, t3,
t4, t5, t8, t9, t10 and t11.
The Idle task and Task 2 enter the Running state in turn, which can result in both tasks being in the
Running state for part of the same time slice, as happens between time t5 and time t8.
Task 1
The priority of Task 1 is higher than the Idle priority. Task 1 is an event driven task that spends most of its
time in the Blocked state waiting for its event of interest, transitioning from the Blocked state to the
Ready state each time the event occurs.
The event of interest occurs at time t6. At t6 Task 1 becomes the highest priority task that is able to run,
and therefore Task 1 preempts the Idle task part way through a time slice. Processing of the event
completes at time t7, at which point Task 1 re-enters the Blocked state.
Figure 4.19 shows the Idle task sharing processing time with a task created by the application writer. Allocating
that much processing time to the Idle task might not be desirable if the Idle priority tasks created by the
application writer have work to do, but the Idle task does not. The configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD compile time
configuration constant can be used to change how the Idle task is scheduled:
If configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD is set to 0 then the Idle task remains in the Running state for the entirety
of its time slice, unless it is preempted by a higher priority task.
If configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD is set to 1 then the Idle task yields (voluntarily gives up whatever remains
of its allocated time slice) on each iteration of its loop if there are other Idle priority tasks in the Ready
state.
The execution pattern shown in Figure 4.19 is what would be observed when configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD is
set to 0. The execution pattern shown in Figure 4.20 is what would be observed in the same scenario when
configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD is set to 1.
Figure 4.20 The execution pattern for the same scenario as shown in Figure 4.19, but this time with
configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD set to 1

Figure 4.20 also shows that when configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD is set to 1, the task selected to enter the
Running state after the Idle task does not execute for an entire time slice, but instead executes for whatever
remains of the time slice during which the Idle task yielded.
4.12.4 Prioritized Preemptive Scheduling without Time Slicing
Prioritized Preemptive Scheduling without time slicing maintains the same task selection and preemption
algorithms as described in the previous section, but does not use time slicing to share processing time
between tasks of equal priority.
The Table 5 shows the FreeRTOSConfig.h settings that configure the FreeRTOS scheduler to use prioritized
preemptive scheduling without time slicing.
As was demonstrated in Figure 4.19, if time slicing is used, and there is more than one ready state task at the
highest priority that is able to run, then the scheduler selects a new task to enter the Running state during each
RTOS tick interrupt (a tick interrupt marking the end of a time slice). If time slicing is not used, then the
scheduler only selects a new task to enter the Running state when either:
A higher priority task enters the Ready state.
The task in the Running state enters the Blocked or Suspended state.
There are fewer task context switches when time slicing is not used than when time slicing is used. Therefore,
turning time slicing off results in a reduction in the scheduler's processing overhead. However, turning time
slicing off can also result in tasks of equal priority receiving greatly different amounts of processing time, a
scenario demonstrated by Figure 4.21. For this reason, running the scheduler without time slicing is considered
an advanced technique that should only be used by experienced users.
Figure 4.21 Execution pattern that demonstrates how tasks of equal priority can receive hugely different
amounts of processing time when time slicing is not used
Referring to Figure 4.21, which assumes configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD is set to 0:
Tick Interrupts
Tick interrupts occur at times t1, t2, t3, t4, t5, t8, t11, t12 and t13.
Task 1

Task 1 is a high priority event driven task that spends most of its time in the Blocked state waiting for its
event of interest. Task 1 transitions from the Blocked state to the Ready state (and subsequently, as it is
the highest priority Ready state task, on into the Running state) each time the event occurs. Figure 4.21
shows Task 1 processing an event between times t6 and t7, then again between times t9 and t10.
The Idle Task and Task 2
The Idle task and Task 2 are both continuous processing tasks, and both have a priority of 0 (the idle
priority). Continuous processing tasks do not enter the Blocked state.
Time slicing is not being used, so an idle priority task that is in the Running state will remain in the
Running state until it is preempted by the higher priority Task 1.
In Figure 4.21 the Idle task starts running at time t1, and remains in the Running state until it is
preempted by Task 1 at time t6, which is more than four complete tick periods after it entered the
Running state.
Task 2 starts running at time t7, which is when Task 1 re-enters the Blocked state to wait for another
event. Task 2 remains in the Running state until it too is preempted by Task 1 at time t9, which is less
than one tick period after it entered the Running state.
At time t10 the Idle task re-enters the Running state, despite having already received more than four
times more processing time than Task 2.
4.12.5 Cooperative Scheduling
This book focuses on preemptive scheduling, but FreeRTOS can also use cooperative scheduling. The Table 5
shows the FreeRTOSConfig.h settings that configure the FreeRTOS scheduler to use cooperative scheduling.
When using the cooperative scheduler (and therefore assuming application-provided interrupt service routines
do not explicitly request context switches) a context switch only occurs when the Running state task enters the
Blocked state, or the Running state task explicitly yields (manually requests a re-schedule) by calling
taskYIELD(). Tasks are never preempted, so time slicing cannot be used.
Figure 4.22 demonstrates the behavior of the cooperative scheduler. The horizontal dashed lines in Figure 4.22
show when a task is in the Ready state.
Figure 4.22 Execution pattern demonstrating the behavior of the cooperative scheduler

Referring to Figure 4.22:
Task 1
Task 1 has the highest priority. It starts in the Blocked state, waiting for a semaphore.
At time t3, an interrupt gives the semaphore, causing Task 1 to leave the Blocked state and enter the
Ready state (giving semaphores from interrupts is covered in Chapter 6).
At time t3, Task 1 is the highest priority Ready state task, and if the preemptive scheduler had been used
Task 1 would become the Running state task. However, as the cooperative scheduler is being used, Task
1 remains in the Ready state until time t4, which is when the Running state task calls taskYIELD().
Task 2
The priority of Task 2 is between that of Task 1 and Task 3. It starts in the Blocked state, waiting for a
message that is sent to it by Task 3 at time t2.
At time t2, Task 2 is the highest priority Ready state task, and if the preemptive scheduler had been used
Task 2 would become the Running state task. However, as the cooperative scheduler is being used, Task
2 remains in the Ready state until the Running state task either enters the Blocked state or calls
taskYIELD().
The Running state task calls taskYIELD() at time t4, but by then Task 1 is the highest priority Ready
state task, so Task 2 does not actually become the Running state task until Task 1 re-enters the Blocked
state at time t5.
At time t6, Task 2 re-enters the Blocked state to wait for the next message, at which point Task 3 is once
again the highest priority Ready state task.
In a multi-tasking application the application writer must take care that a resource is not accessed by more
than one task simultaneously, as simultaneous access could corrupt the resource. As an example, consider the
following scenario in which the accessed resource is a UART (serial port). Two tasks write strings to the UART;
Task 1 writes "abcdefghijklmnop", and Task 2 writes "123456789":
1. Task 1 is in the Running state and starts to write its string. It writes "abcdefg" to the UART, but leaves the
Running state before writing any further characters.
2. Task 2 enters the Running state and writes "123456789" to the UART, before leaving the Running state.
3. Task 1 re-enters the Running state and writes the remaining characters of its string to the UART.
In that scenario, what is actually written to the UART is "abcdefg123456789hijklmnop". The string written by
Task 1 has not been written to the UART in an unbroken sequence as intended, but instead it has been
corrupted, because the string written to the UART by Task 2 appears within it.
Using the cooperative scheduler normally makes it easier to avoid problems caused by simultaneous access
than when using the preemptive scheduler[^7]:
[^7]: Methods of safely sharing resources between tasks are covered later in this book. Resources provided by
FreeRTOS itself, such as queues and semaphores, are always safe to share between tasks.

When you use the preemptive scheduler the Running state task can be preempted at any time, including
when a resource it is sharing with another task is in an inconsistent state. As just demonstrated by the
UART example, leaving a resource in an inconsistent state can result in data corruption.
When you use the cooperative scheduler you control when a switch to another task occurs. You can,
therefore, ensure a switch to another task does not occur while a resource is in an inconsistent state.
In the above UART example, you can ensure Task 1 does not leave the Running state until after writing
its entire string to the UART and, in doing so, remove the possibility of the string being corrupted by the
activities of another task.
As demonstrated in Figure 4.22, using the cooperative scheduler makes systems less responsive than when
using the preemptive scheduler:
When using the preemptive scheduler, the scheduler starts running a task immediately when the task
becomes the highest priority Ready state task. This is often essential in real-time systems which must
respond to high priority events within a defined time period.
When using the cooperative scheduler, a switch to a task that has become the highest priority Ready
state task is not performed until the Running state task enters the Blocked state or calls taskYIELD().

5 Queue Management
5.1 Introduction
'Queues' provide a task-to-task, task-to-interrupt, and interrupt-to-task communication mechanism.
5.1.1 Scope
This chapter covers:
How to create a queue.
How a queue manages the data it contains.
How to send data to a queue.
How to receive data from a queue.
What it means to block on a queue.
How to block on multiple queues.
How to overwrite data in a queue.
How to clear a queue.
The effect of task priorities when writing to and reading from a queue.
This chapter only covers task-to-task communication. Chapter 7 covers task-to-interrupt and interrupt-to-task
communication.
5.2 Characteristics of a Queue
5.2.1 Data Storage
A queue can hold a finite number of fixed size data items[^8]. The maximum number of items a queue can
hold is called its 'length'. Both the length and the size of each data item are set when the queue is created.
[^8]: FreeRTOS message buffers, described in chapter TBD, provide a lighter weight alternative to queues that
hold variable length messages.
Queues are normally used as First In First Out (FIFO) buffers, where data is written to the end (tail) of the queue
and removed from the front (head) of the queue. Figure 5.1 demonstrates data being written to and read from
a queue that is being used as a FIFO. It is also possible to write to the front of a queue, and to overwrite data
that is already at the front of a queue.

Figure 5.1 An example sequence of writes to, and reads from a queue
There are two ways in which queue behaviour can be implemented:
1. Queue by copy
Queuing by copy means the data sent to the queue is copied byte for byte into the queue.

2. Queue by reference
Queuing by reference means the queue only holds pointers to the data sent to the queue, not the data
itself.
FreeRTOS uses the queue by copy method because it is both more powerful and simpler to use than queueing
by reference because:
Queuing by copy does not prevent the queue from also being used to queue by reference. For example,
when the size of the data being queued makes it impractical to copy the data into the queue, then a
pointer to the data can be copied into the queue instead.
A stack variable can be sent directly to a queue, even though the variable will not exist after the function
in which it is declared has exited.
Data can be sent to a queue without first allocating a buffer to hold the data—you then copy the data
into the allocated buffer and queue a reference to the buffer.
The sending task can immediately re-use the variable or buffer that was sent to the queue.
The sending task and the receiving task are completely de-coupled; an application designer does not
need to concern themself with which task 'owns' the data, or which task is responsible for releasing the
data.
The RTOS takes complete responsibility for allocating the memory used to store data.
Memory protected systems restrict access to RAM, in which case queueing by reference can only be
accomplished if the sending and receiving tasks can both access the referenced data. Queuing by copy
allows data to pass across memory protection boundaries.
5.2.2 Access by Multiple Tasks
Queues are objects in their own right and can be accessed by any task or ISR that knows of their existence. Any
number of tasks can write to the same queue, and any number of tasks can read from the same queue. In
practice, it is very common for a queue to have multiple writers, but much less common for a queue to have
multiple readers.
5.2.3 Blocking on Queue Reads
When a task attempts to read from a queue, it can optionally specify a 'block' time. This is the time the task is
kept in the Blocked state to wait for data to become available from the queue, if the queue is already empty. A
task that is in the Blocked state waiting for data to become available from a queue is automatically moved to
the Ready state when another task or interrupt places data into the queue. The task will also be moved
automatically from the Blocked state to the Ready state if the specified block time expires before data
becomes available.
Queues can have multiple readers, so it is possible for a single queue to have more than one task blocked on it
waiting for data. When this is the case, only one task is unblocked when data becomes available. The task that
is unblocked is always the highest priority task that is waiting for data. If two or more blocked tasks have equal
priority, then the task that is unblocked is the one that has been waiting the longest.
5.2.4 Blocking on Queue Writes

Just as it can when reading from a queue, a task can optionally specify a block time when writing to a queue. In
this case, the block time is the maximum time the task will be held in the Blocked state to wait for space to
become available on the queue, should the queue already be full.
Queues can have multiple writers, so it is possible for a full queue to have more than one task blocked on it
waiting to complete a send operation. When this is the case, only one task is unblocked when space on the
queue becomes available. The task that is unblocked is always the highest priority task that is waiting for space.
If two or more blocked tasks have equal priority, then the task that is unblocked is the one that has been
waiting the longest.
5.2.5 Blocking on Multiple Queues
Queues can be grouped into sets, allowing a task to enter the Blocked state to wait for data to become
available on any of the queues in the set. Section 5.6, Receiving From Multiple Queues, demonstrates queue
sets.
5.2.6 Creating Queues: Statically Allocated and Dynamically Allocated Queues
Queues are referenced by handles, which are variables of type QueueHandle_t. A queue must be explicitly
created before it can be used.
Two API functions create queues: xQueueCreate(), xQueueCreateStatic().
Each queue requires two blocks of RAM, the first to hold its data structure, and the second to hold queued
data. xQueueCreate() allocates the required RAM from the heap (dynamically). xQueueCreateStatic() uses
pre-allocated RAM passed into the function as parameters.
5.3 Using a Queue
5.3.1 The xQueueCreate() API Function
Listing 5.1 shows the xQueueCreate() function prototype. xQueueCreateStatic() has two additional
parameters that point to the memory pre-allocated to hold the queue's data structure and data storage area,
respectively.
QueueHandle_t xQueueCreate( UBaseType_t uxQueueLength, UBaseType_t uxItemSize ); 
Listing 5.1 The xQueueCreate() API function prototype
xQueueCreate() parameters and return value:
uxQueueLength
The maximum number of items that the queue being created can hold at any one time.
uxItemSize
The size in bytes of each data item that can be stored in the queue.
Return value

If NULL is returned, then the queue cannot be created because there is insufficient heap memory
available for FreeRTOS to allocate the queue data structures and storage area. Chapter 2 provides more
information on the FreeRTOS heap.
If a non-NULL value is returned then the queue was created successfully and the returned value is the
handle to the created queue.
xQueueReset() is an API function that restores a previously created queue to its original empty state.
5.3.2 The xQueueSendToBack() and xQueueSendToFront() API Functions
As might be expected, xQueueSendToBack() sends data to the back (tail) of a queue, and
xQueueSendToFront() sends data to the front (head) of a queue.
xQueueSend() is equivalent to, and exactly the same as, xQueueSendToBack().
Note: Never call xQueueSendToFront() or xQueueSendToBack() from an interrupt service routine. The
interrupt-safe versions xQueueSendToFrontFromISR() and xQueueSendToBackFromISR() should be
used in their place. These are described in Chapter 7.
BaseType_t xQueueSendToFront( QueueHandle_t xQueue, 
                              const void * pvItemToQueue, 
                              TickType_t xTicksToWait ); 
Listing 5.2 The xQueueSendToFront() API function prototype
BaseType_t xQueueSendToBack( QueueHandle_t xQueue, 
                             const void * pvItemToQueue, 
                             TickType_t xTicksToWait ); 
Listing 5.3 The xQueueSendToBack() API function prototype
xQueueSendToFront() and xQueueSendToBack() function parameters and return value
xQueue
The handle of the queue to which the data is being sent (written). The queue handle will have been
returned from the call to xQueueCreate() or xQueueCreateStatic() which are used to create the
queue.
pvItemToQueue
A pointer to the data to be copied into the queue.
The size of each item the queue can hold is set when the queue is created, so that many bytes are
copied from pvItemToQueue into the queue storage area.
xTicksToWait

The maximum amount of time the task should remain in the Blocked state to wait for space to become
available on the queue, should the queue already be full.
Both xQueueSendToFront() and xQueueSendToBack() will return immediately if xTicksToWait is
zero and the queue is already full.
The block time is specified in tick periods, so the absolute time it represents is dependent on the tick
frequency. The macro pdMS_TO_TICKS() can be used to convert a time specified in milliseconds into a
time specified in ticks.
Setting xTicksToWait to portMAX_DELAY will cause the task to wait indefinitely (without timing out),
provided INCLUDE_vTaskSuspend is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
Return value
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
pdPASS is returned when data was successfully sent to the queue.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero), then it is possible the calling task was
placed into the Blocked state to wait for space to become available in the queue before the
function returned, but data was successfully written to the queue before the block time expired.
errQUEUE_FULL (same value as pdFAIL)
errQUEUE_FULL is returned if data could not be written to the queue because the queue was
already full.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero) then the calling task will have been
placed into the Blocked state to wait for another task or interrupt to make space in the queue, but
the specified block time expired before that happened.
5.3.3 The xQueueReceive() API Function
xQueueReceive() receives (reads) an item from a queue. The received item is removed from the queue.
Note: Never call xQueueReceive() from an interrupt service routine. The interrupt-safe
xQueueReceiveFromISR() API function is described in Chapter 7.
BaseType_t xQueueReceive( QueueHandle_t xQueue, 
                          void * const pvBuffer, 
                          TickType_t xTicksToWait ); 
Listing 5.4 The xQueueReceive() API function prototype
xQueueReceive() function parameters and return values
xQueue

The handle of the queue from which the data is being received (read). The queue handle will have been
returned from the call to xQueueCreate() or xQueueCreateStatic() used to create the queue.
pvBuffer
A pointer to the memory into which the received data will be copied.
The size of each data item that the queue holds is set when the queue is created. The memory pointed
to by pvBuffer must be at least large enough to hold that many bytes.
xTicksToWait
The maximum amount of time the task should remain in the Blocked state to wait for data to become
available on the queue, if the queue is already be empty.
If xTicksToWait is zero, then xQueueReceive() will return immediately if the queue is already empty.
The block time is specified in tick periods, so the absolute time it represents is dependent on the tick
frequency. The macro pdMS_TO_TICKS() can be used to convert a time specified in milliseconds into a
time specified in ticks.
Setting xTicksToWait to portMAX_DELAY will cause the task to wait indefinitely (without timing out)
provided INCLUDE_vTaskSuspend is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
Return value
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
pdPASS is returned when data was successfully read from the queue.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero), then it is possible the calling task was
placed into the Blocked state to wait for data to become available on the queue, but data was
successfully read from the queue before the block time expired.
errQUEUE_EMPTY (same value as pdFAIL)
errQUEUE_EMPTY is returned if data cannot be read from the queue because the queue is already
empty.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero,) then the calling task will have been
placed into the Blocked state to wait for another task or interrupt to send data to the queue, but
the block time expired before that happened.
5.3.4 The uxQueueMessagesWaiting() API Function
uxQueueMessagesWaiting() queries the number of items currently in a queue.
Note: Never call uxQueueMessagesWaiting() from an interrupt service routine. The interrupt-safe
uxQueueMessagesWaitingFromISR() should be used in its place.
UBaseType_t uxQueueMessagesWaiting( QueueHandle_t xQueue );

Listing 5.5 The uxQueueMessagesWaiting() API function prototype
uxQueueMessagesWaiting() function parameters and return value
xQueue
The handle of the queue being queried. The queue handle will have been returned from the call to
xQueueCreate() or xQueueCreateStatic() which are used to create the queue.
Return value
The number of items currently in the queue being queried. If zero is returned, then the queue is empty.
Example 5.1 Blocking when receiving from a queue
This example demonstrates creating a queue, sending data to the queue from multiple tasks, and receiving
data from the queue. The queue is created to hold data items of type int32_t. The tasks that send to the
queue do not specify a block time, whereas the task that receives from the queue does.
The tasks that send to the queue have a lower priority than the task that receives from the queue. This means
the queue should never contain more than one item because, as soon as data is sent to the queue the
receiving task will unblock, pre-empt the sending task (because it has a higher priority), and remove the data,
leaving the queue empty once again.
The example creates two instances of the task shown in Listing 5.6, one that continuously writes the value 100
to the queue, and another that continuously writes the value 200 to the same queue. The task parameter is
used to pass these values into each task instance.
static void vSenderTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    int32_t lValueToSend; 
    BaseType_t xStatus; 
    /* Two instances of this task are created so the value that is sent to 
       the queue is passed in via the task parameter - this way each instance 
       can use a different value. The queue was created to hold values of type 
       int32_t, so cast the parameter to the required type. */ 
    lValueToSend = ( int32_t ) pvParameters; 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Send the value to the queue. 
           The first parameter is the queue to which data is being sent. The 
           queue was created before the scheduler was started, so before this 
           task started to execute.

The second parameter is the address of the data to be sent, in this 
           case the address of lValueToSend. 
           The third parameter is the Block time – the time the task should be 
           kept in the Blocked state to wait for space to become available on 
           the queue should the queue already be full. In this case a block 
           time is not specified because the queue should never contain more 
           than one item, and therefore never be full. */ 
        xStatus = xQueueSendToBack( xQueue, &lValueToSend, 0 ); 
        if( xStatus != pdPASS ) 
        { 
            /* The send operation could not complete because the queue was full- 
               this must be an error as the queue should never contain more than 
               one item! */ 
            vPrintString( "Could not send to the queue.\r\n" ); 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 5.6 Implementation of the sending task used in Example 5.1
Listing 5.7 shows the implementation of the task that receives data from the queue. The receiving task specifies
a block time of 100 milliseconds, then enters the Blocked state to wait for data to become available. It leaves
the Blocked state when either data is available on the queue, or 100 milliseconds passes without data
becoming available. In this example, there are two tasks continuously writing to the queue so the 100
milliseconds timeout never expires.
static void vReceiverTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    /* Declare the variable that will hold the values received from the 
       queue. */ 
    int32_t lReceivedValue; 
    BaseType_t xStatus; 
    const TickType_t xTicksToWait = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 100 ); 
    /* This task is also defined within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* This call should always find the queue empty because this task will 
           immediately remove any data that is written to the queue. */ 
        if( uxQueueMessagesWaiting( xQueue ) != 0 ) 
        { 
            vPrintString( "Queue should have been empty!\r\n" ); 
        } 
        /* Receive data from the queue. 
           The first parameter is the queue from which data is to be received. 
           The queue is created before the scheduler is started, and therefore

before this task runs for the first time. 
           The second parameter is the buffer into which the received data will 
           be placed. In this case the buffer is simply the address of a 
           variable that has the required size to hold the received data. 
           The last parameter is the block time – the maximum amount of time 
           that the task will remain in the Blocked state to wait for data to 
           be available should the queue already be empty. */ 
        xStatus = xQueueReceive( xQueue, &lReceivedValue, xTicksToWait ); 
        if( xStatus == pdPASS ) 
        { 
            /* Data was successfully received from the queue, print out the 
               received value. */ 
            vPrintStringAndNumber( "Received = ", lReceivedValue ); 
        } 
        else 
        { 
            /* Data was not received from the queue even after waiting for 
               100ms. This must be an error as the sending tasks are free 
               running and will be continuously writing to the queue. */ 
            vPrintString( "Could not receive from the queue.\r\n" ); 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 5.7 Implementation of the receiver task for Example 5.1
Listing 5.8 contains the definition of the main() function. This simply creates the queue and the three tasks
before starting the scheduler. The queue is created to hold a maximum of five int32_t values, even though
the relative task priorities mean the queue will never hold more than one item at a time.
/* Declare a variable of type QueueHandle_t. This is used to store the 
   handle to the queue that is accessed by all three tasks. */ 
QueueHandle_t xQueue; 
int main( void )
{ 
    /* The queue is created to hold a maximum of 5 values, each of which is 
       large enough to hold a variable of type int32_t. */ 
    xQueue = xQueueCreate( 5, sizeof( int32_t ) ); 
    if( xQueue != NULL ) 
    { 
        /* Create two instances of the task that will send to the queue. The 
           task parameter is used to pass the value that the task will write 
           to the queue, so one task will continuously write 100 to the queue 
           while the other task will continuously write 200 to the queue. Both 
           tasks are created at priority 1. */ 
        xTaskCreate( vSenderTask, "Sender1", 1000, ( void * ) 100, 1, NULL ); 
        xTaskCreate( vSenderTask, "Sender2", 1000, ( void * ) 200, 1, NULL );

/* Create the task that will read from the queue. The task is created 
           with priority 2, so above the priority of the sender tasks. */ 
        xTaskCreate( vReceiverTask, "Receiver", 1000, NULL, 2, NULL ); 
        /* Start the scheduler so the created tasks start executing. */ 
        vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    } 
    else 
    { 
        /* The queue could not be created. */ 
    } 
    /* If all is well then main() will never reach here as the scheduler will 
       now be running the tasks. If main() does reach here then it is likely 
       that there was insufficient FreeRTOS heap memory available for the idle 
       task to be created. Chapter 3 provides more information on heap memory 
       management. */ 
    for( ;; ); 
} 
Listing 5.8 The implementation of main() in Example 5.1
Figure 5.2 shows the output produced by Example 5.1.
Figure 5.2 The output produced when Example 5.1 is executed
Figure 5.3 demonstrates the sequence of execution.

Figure 5.3 The sequence of execution produced by Example 5.1
5.4 Receiving Data From Multiple Sources
It is common in FreeRTOS designs for a task to receive data from more than one source. The receiving task
needs to know where the data came from to determine what to do with it. An easy design pattern to achieve
that uses a single queue to transfer structures that contain both the data value and data source, as
demonstrated in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4 An example scenario where structures are sent on a queue
Referring to Figure 5.4:

The created queue holds structures of type Data_t. The structure allows both a data value and an
enumerated type indicating what the data means to be sent to the queue in one message.
A central Controller task performs the primary system function. This has to react to inputs and changes
to the system state communicated to it on the queue.
A CAN bus task is used to encapsulate the CAN bus interfacing functionality. When the CAN bus task
has received and decoded a message, it sends the already decoded message to the Controller task in a
Data_t structure. The eDataID member of the transferred structure tells the Controller task what the
data is. In the case shown here, it is a motor speed value. The lDataValue member of the transferred
structure tells the Controller task the actual motor speed value.
A Human Machine Interface (HMI) task is used to encapsulate all the HMI functionality. The machine
operator can probably input commands and query values in a number of ways that have to be detected
and interpreted within the HMI task. When a new command is input, the HMI task sends the command
to the Controller task in a Data_t structure. The eDataID member of the transferred structure tells the
Controller task what the data is. In the case shown here, it is a new set point value. The lDataValue
member of the transferred structure tells the Controller task the actual set point value.
Chapter (RB-TBD) shows how to extend this design pattern such that the controller task can reply directly to
the task that queued a structure.
Example 5.2 Blocking when sending to a queue, and sending structures on a queue
Example 5.2 is similar to Example 5.1, but with reversed task priorities, so the receiving task has a lower priority
than the sending tasks. Also, the created queue holds structures rather than integers.
Listing 5.9 shows the definition of the structure used by Example 5.2.
/* Define an enumerated type used to identify the source of the data. */
typedef enum 
{ 
    eSender1, 
    eSender2 
} DataSource_t; 
/* Define the structure type that will be passed on the queue. */
typedef struct 
{ 
    uint8_t ucValue; 
    DataSource_t eDataSource; 
} Data_t; 
/* Declare two variables of type Data_t that will be passed on the queue. */
static const Data_t xStructsToSend[ 2 ] = 
{ 
    { 100, eSender1 }, /* Used by Sender1. */ 
    { 200, eSender2 }  /* Used by Sender2. */ 
};

Listing 5.9 The definition of the structure that is to be passed on a queue, plus the declaration of two variables
for use by the example
In Example 5.1, the receiving task has the highest priority, so the queue never contains more than one item.
This happens because the receiving task pre-empts the sending tasks as soon as data is placed into the queue.
In Example 5.2, the sending tasks have the higher priority, so the queue will normally be full. This is because, as
soon as the receiving task removes an item from the queue, it is pre-empted by one of the sending tasks which
then immediately re-fills the queue. The sending task then re-enters the Blocked state to wait for space to
become available on the queue again.
Listing 5.10 shows the implementation of the sending task. The sending task specifies a block time of 100
milliseconds, so it enters the Blocked state to wait for space to become available each time the queue becomes
full. It leaves the Blocked state when either space is available on the queue, or 100 milliseconds passes without
space becoming available. In this example, the receiving tasks continuously make space in the queue, so the
100 milliseconds timeout never expires.
static void vSenderTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    BaseType_t xStatus; 
    const TickType_t xTicksToWait = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 100 ); 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Send to the queue. 
           The second parameter is the address of the structure being sent. The 
           address is passed in as the task parameter so pvParameters is used 
           directly. 
           The third parameter is the Block time - the time the task should be 
           kept in the Blocked state to wait for space to become available on 
           the queue if the queue is already full. A block time is specified 
           because the sending tasks have a higher priority than the receiving 
           task so the queue is expected to become full. The receiving task 
           will remove items from the queue when both sending tasks are in the 
           Blocked state. */ 
        xStatus = xQueueSendToBack( xQueue, pvParameters, xTicksToWait ); 
        if( xStatus != pdPASS ) 
        { 
            /* The send operation could not complete, even after waiting for 
               100ms. This must be an error as the receiving task should make 
               space in the queue as soon as both sending tasks are in the 
               Blocked state. */ 
            vPrintString( "Could not send to the queue.\r\n" ); 
        } 
    } 
}

Listing 5.10 The implementation of the sending task for Example 5.2
The receiving task has the lowest priority so it only runs only when both sending tasks are in the Blocked state.
The sending tasks only enter the Blocked state when the queue is full, so the receiving task will only execute
when the queue is already full. Therefore, it always expects to receive data even when it does not specify a
block time.
Listing 5.11 shows the implementation of the receiving task.
static void vReceiverTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    /* Declare the structure that will hold the values received from the 
       queue. */ 
    Data_t xReceivedStructure; 
    BaseType_t xStatus; 
    /* This task is also defined within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Because it has the lowest priority this task will only run when the 
           sending tasks are in the Blocked state. The sending tasks will only 
           enter the Blocked state when the queue is full so this task always 
           expects the number of items in the queue to be equal to the queue 
           length, which is 3 in this case. */ 
        if( uxQueueMessagesWaiting( xQueue ) != 3 ) 
        { 
            vPrintString( "Queue should have been full!\r\n" ); 
        } 
        /* Receive from the queue. 
           The second parameter is the buffer into which the received data will 
           be placed. In this case the buffer is simply the address of a 
           variable that has the required size to hold the received structure. 
           The last parameter is the block time - the maximum amount of time 
           that the task will remain in the Blocked state to wait for data to 
           be available if the queue is already empty. In this case a block 
           time is not necessary because this task will only run when the 
           queue is full. */ 
        xStatus = xQueueReceive( xQueue, &xReceivedStructure, 0 ); 
        if( xStatus == pdPASS ) 
        { 
            /* Data was successfully received from the queue, print out the 
               received value and the source of the value. */ 
            if( xReceivedStructure.eDataSource == eSender1 ) 
            { 
                vPrintStringAndNumber( "From Sender 1 = ", 
                                       xReceivedStructure.ucValue ); 
            } 
            else 
            {

vPrintStringAndNumber( "From Sender 2 = ", 
                                       xReceivedStructure.ucValue ); 
            } 
        } 
        else 
        { 
            /* Nothing was received from the queue. This must be an error as 
               this task should only run when the queue is full. */ 
            vPrintString( "Could not receive from the queue.\r\n" ); 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 5.11 The definition of the receiving task for Example 5.2
main() changes only slightly from the previous example. The queue is created to hold three Data_t
structures, and the priorities of the sending and receiving tasks are reversed. Listing 5.12 shows the
implementation of main().
int main( void )
{ 
    /* The queue is created to hold a maximum of 3 structures of type Data_t. */ 
    xQueue = xQueueCreate( 3, sizeof( Data_t ) ); 
    if( xQueue != NULL ) 
    { 
        /* Create two instances of the task that will write to the queue. The 
           parameter is used to pass the structure that the task will write to 
           the queue, so one task will continuously send xStructsToSend[ 0 ] 
           to the queue while the other task will continuously send 
           xStructsToSend[ 1 ]. Both tasks are created at priority 2, which is 
           above the priority of the receiver. */ 
        xTaskCreate( vSenderTask, "Sender1", 1000, &( xStructsToSend[ 0 ] ), 
                     2, NULL ); 
        xTaskCreate( vSenderTask, "Sender2", 1000, &( xStructsToSend[ 1 ] ), 
                     2, NULL ); 
        /* Create the task that will read from the queue. The task is created 
           with priority 1, so below the priority of the sender tasks. */ 
        xTaskCreate( vReceiverTask, "Receiver", 1000, NULL, 1, NULL ); 
        /* Start the scheduler so the created tasks start executing. */ 
        vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    } 
    else 
    { 
        /* The queue could not be created. */ 
    } 
    /* If all is well then main() will never reach here as the scheduler will 
       now be running the tasks. If main() does reach here then it is likely 
       that there was insufficient heap memory available for the idle task to

be created. Chapter 3 provides more information on heap memory 
       management. */ 
    for( ;; ); 
} 
Listing 5.12 The implementation of main() for Example 5.2
Figure 5.5 shows the output produced by Example 5.2.
Figure 5.5 The output produced by Example 5.2
Figure 5.6 demonstrates the sequence of execution that results from having the priority of the sending tasks
above the priority of the receiving task. Given below is a further explanation of Figure 5.6, and description on
why the first four messages originate from the same task.
execution produced by Example 5.2
 Figure 5.6 The sequence of

Key to Figure 5.6
t1
Task Sender 1 executes and sends 3 data items to the queue.
t2
The queue is full so Sender 1 enters the Blocked state to wait for its next send to complete. Task Sender
2 is now the highest priority task that can run, so it enters the Running state.
t3
Task Sender 2 finds the queue is already full, so it enters the Blocked state to wait for its first send to
complete. Task Receiver is now the highest priority task that can run, so it enters the Running state.
t4
Two tasks that have a priority higher than the receiving task's priority are waiting for space to become
available on the queue, resulting in task Receiver being pre-empted as soon as it has removed one item
from the queue. Tasks Sender 1 and Sender 2 have the same priority, so the scheduler selects the task
that has been waiting the longest as the task that will enter the Running state—in this case that is task
Sender 1.
t5
Task Sender 1 sends another data item to the queue. There was only one space in the queue, so task
Sender 1 enters the Blocked state to wait for its next send to complete. Task Receiver is again the
highest priority task that can run so it enters the Running state.
Task Sender 1 has now sent four items to the queue, and task Sender 2 is still waiting to send its first
item to the queue.
t6
Two tasks that have a priority higher than the receiving task's priority are waiting for space to become
available on the queue, so task Receiver is pre-empted as soon as it has removed one item from the
queue. This time Sender 2 has been waiting longer than Sender 1, so Sender 2 enters the Running state.
t7
Task Sender 2 sends a data item to the queue. There was only one space in the queue so Sender 2 enters
the Blocked state to wait for its next send to complete. Both tasks Sender 1 and Sender 2 are waiting for
space to become available on the queue, so task Receiver is the only task that can enter the Running
state.
5.5 Working with Large or Variable Sized Data
5.5.1 Queuing Pointers
If the size of the data stored in the queue is large, then it is preferable to use the queue to transfer pointers to
the data, rather than copy the data itself into and out of the queue byte by byte. Transferring pointers is more

efficient in both processing time and the amount of RAM required to create the queue. However, when
queuing pointers, extreme care must be taken to ensure that:
The owner of the RAM being pointed to is clearly defined.
When sharing memory between tasks via a pointer, it is essential to ensure both tasks do not modify the
memory contents simultaneously, or take any other action that could cause the memory contents to be
invalid or inconsistent. Ideally, only the sending task should be permitted to access the memory before
the pointer is sent to the queue, and only the receiving task should be permitted to access the memory
after the pointer has been received from the queue.
The RAM being pointed to remains valid.
If the memory being pointed to was allocated dynamically, or obtained from a pool of pre-allocated
buffers, then exactly one task should be responsible for freeing the memory. No tasks should attempt to
access the memory after it has been freed.
A pointer should never be used to access data that has been allocated on a task stack. The data will not
be valid after the stack frame has changed.
By way of example, Listings 5.13, 5.14 and 5.15 demonstrate how to use a queue to send a pointer to a buffer
from one task to another:
Listing 5.13 creates a queue that can hold up to 5 pointers.
Listing 5.14 allocates a buffer, writes a string to the buffer, then sends a pointer to the buffer to the
queue.
Listing 5.15 receives a pointer to a buffer from the queue, then prints the string contained in the buffer.
/* Declare a variable of type QueueHandle_t to hold the handle of the 
   queue being created. */ 
QueueHandle_t xPointerQueue; 
/* Create a queue that can hold a maximum of 5 pointers, in this case 
   character pointers. */ 
xPointerQueue = xQueueCreate( 5, sizeof( char * ) ); 
Listing 5.13 Creating a queue that holds pointers
/* A task that obtains a buffer, writes a string to the buffer, then 
   sends the address of the buffer to the queue created in Listing 5.13. */
void vStringSendingTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    char *pcStringToSend; 
    const size_t xMaxStringLength = 50; 
    BaseType_t xStringNumber = 0; 
    for( ;; ) 
    {

/* Obtain a buffer that is at least xMaxStringLength characters big. 
           The implementation of prvGetBuffer() is not shown – it might obtain 
           the buffer from a pool of pre-allocated buffers, or just allocate 
           the buffer dynamically. */ 
        pcStringToSend = ( char * ) prvGetBuffer( xMaxStringLength ); 
        /* Write a string into the buffer. */ 
        snprintf( pcStringToSend, xMaxStringLength, "String number %d\r\n", 
                  xStringNumber ); 
        /* Increment the counter so the string is different on each iteration 
           of this task. */ 
        xStringNumber++; 
        /* Send the address of the buffer to the queue that was created in 
           Listing 5.13. The address of the buffer is stored in the 
           pcStringToSend variable.*/ 
        xQueueSend( xPointerQueue,   /* The handle of the queue. */ 
                    &pcStringToSend, /* The address of the pointer that points 
                                        to the buffer. */ 
                    portMAX_DELAY ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 5.14 Using a queue to send a pointer to a buffer
/* A task that receives the address of a buffer from the queue created 
   in Listing 5.13, and written to in Listing 5.14. The buffer contains a 
   string, which is printed out. */ 
void vStringReceivingTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    char *pcReceivedString; 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Receive the address of a buffer. */ 
        xQueueReceive( xPointerQueue,     /* The handle of the queue. */ 
                       &pcReceivedString, /* Store the buffer's address in 
                                             pcReceivedString. */ 
                       portMAX_DELAY ); 
        /* The buffer holds a string, print it out. */ 
        vPrintString( pcReceivedString ); 
        /* The buffer is not required any more - release it so it can be freed, 
           or re-used. */ 
        prvReleaseBuffer( pcReceivedString ); 
    } 
}

Listing 5.15 Using a queue to receive a pointer to a buffer
5.5.2 Using a Queue to Send Different Types and Lengths of Data[^9]
[^9]: FreeRTOS message buffers are a lighter weight alternative to queues that hold variable length data.
Previous sections of this book demonstrated two powerful design patterns; sending structures to a queue, and
sending pointers to a queue. Combining those techniques allows a task to use a single queue to receive any
data type from any data source. The implementation of the FreeRTOS+TCP TCP/IP stack provides a practical
example of how this is achieved.
The TCP/IP stack, which runs in its own task, must process events from many different sources. Different event
types are associated with different types and lengths of data. IPStackEvent_t structures describe all events
that occur outside of the TCP/IP task, and are sent to the TCP/IP task on a queue. Listing 5.16 shows the
IPStackEvent_t structure. The pvData member of the IPStackEvent_t structure is a pointer that can be
used to hold a value directly, or point to a buffer.
/* A subset of the enumerated types used in the TCP/IP stack to 
   identify events. */
typedef enum 
{ 
    eNetworkDownEvent = 0, /* The network interface has been lost, or needs 
                              (re)connecting. */ 
    eNetworkRxEvent,       /* A packet has been received from the network. */ 
    eTCPAcceptEvent,       /* FreeRTOS_accept() called to accept or wait for a 
                              new client. */ 
/* Other event types appear here but are not shown in this listing. */ 
} eIPEvent_t; 
/* The structure that describes events, and is sent on a queue to the 
   TCP/IP task. */
typedef struct IP_TASK_COMMANDS 
{ 
    /* An enumerated type that identifies the event. See the eIPEvent_t 
       definition above. */ 
    eIPEvent_t eEventType; 
    /* A generic pointer that can hold a value, or point to a buffer. */ 
    void *pvData; 
} IPStackEvent_t; 
Listing 5.16 The structure used to send events to the TCP/IP stack task in FreeRTOS+TCP
Example TCP/IP events, and their associated data, include:
eNetworkRxEvent: A packet of data was received from the network.

The network interface sends data received events to the TCP/IP task using a structure of type
IPStackEvent_t. The structure's eEventType member is set to eNetworkRxEvent, and the structure's
pvData member is used to point to the buffer that contains the received data. Listing 59 shows a
pseudo code example.
void vSendRxDataToTheTCPTask( NetworkBufferDescriptor_t *pxRxedData )
{ 
    IPStackEvent_t xEventStruct; 
    /* Complete the IPStackEvent_t structure. The received data is stored in 
       pxRxedData. */ 
    xEventStruct.eEventType = eNetworkRxEvent; 
    xEventStruct.pvData = ( void * ) pxRxedData; 
    /* Send the IPStackEvent_t structure to the TCP/IP task. */ 
    xSendEventStructToIPTask( &xEventStruct ); 
} 
Listing 5.17 Pseudo code showing how an IPStackEvent_t structure is used to send data received from the
network to the TCP/IP task
eTCPAcceptEvent: A socket is to accept, or wait for, a connection from a client.
The task that called FreeRTOS_accept() sends accept events to the TCP/IP task using a structure of
type IPStackEvent_t. The structure's eEventType member is set to eTCPAcceptEvent, and the
structure's pvData member is set to the handle of the socket that is accepting a connection. Listing 5.18
shows a pseudo code example.
void vSendAcceptRequestToTheTCPTask( Socket_t xSocket )
{ 
    IPStackEvent_t xEventStruct; 
    /* Complete the IPStackEvent_t structure. */ 
    xEventStruct.eEventType = eTCPAcceptEvent; 
    xEventStruct.pvData = ( void * ) xSocket; 
    /* Send the IPStackEvent_t structure to the TCP/IP task. */ 
    xSendEventStructToIPTask( &xEventStruct ); 
} 
Listing 5.18 Pseudo code showing how an IPStackEvent_t structure is used to send the handle of a socket
that is accepting a connection to the TCP/IP task
eNetworkDownEvent: The network needs connecting, or re-connecting.
The network interface sends network down events to the TCP/IP task using a structure of type
IPStackEvent_t. The structure's eEventType member is set to eNetworkDownEvent. Network down

events are not associated with any data, so the structure's pvData member is not used. Listing 5.19
shows a pseudo code example.
void vSendNetworkDownEventToTheTCPTask( Socket_t xSocket )
{ 
    IPStackEvent_t xEventStruct; 
    /* Complete the IPStackEvent_t structure. */ 
    xEventStruct.eEventType = eNetworkDownEvent; 
    xEventStruct.pvData = NULL; /* Not used, but set to NULL for 
                                   completeness. */ 
    /* Send the IPStackEvent_t structure to the TCP/IP task. */ 
    xSendEventStructToIPTask( &xEventStruct ); 
} 
Listing 5.19 Pseudo code showing how an IPStackEvent_t structure is used to send a network down event
to the TCP/IP task
Listing 5.20 shows the code that receives and processes these events within the TCP/IP task. It can be
seen that the eEventType member of the IPStackEvent_t structures received from the queue is used
to determine how the pvData member is to be interpreted.
IPStackEvent_t xReceivedEvent; 
/* Block on the network event queue until either an event is received, or 
   xNextIPSleep ticks pass without an event being received. eEventType is 
   set to eNoEvent in case the call to xQueueReceive() returns because it 
   timed out, rather than because an event was received. */ 
xReceivedEvent.eEventType = eNoEvent; 
xQueueReceive( xNetworkEventQueue, &xReceivedEvent, xNextIPSleep ); 
/* Which event was received, if any? */
switch( xReceivedEvent.eEventType ) 
{ 
    case eNetworkDownEvent : 
         /* Attempt to (re)establish a connection. This event is not 
            associated with any data. */ 
         prvProcessNetworkDownEvent(); 
         break; 
    case eNetworkRxEvent: 
         /* The network interface has received a new packet. A pointer to the 
            received data is stored in the pvData member of the received 
            IPStackEvent_t structure. Process the received data. */ 
         prvHandleEthernetPacket( ( NetworkBufferDescriptor_t * ) 
                                  ( xReceivedEvent.pvData ) ); 
         break;

case eTCPAcceptEvent: 
         /* The FreeRTOS_accept() API function was called. The handle of the 
            socket that is accepting a connection is stored in the pvData 
            member of the received IPStackEvent_t structure. */ 
         xSocket = ( FreeRTOS_Socket_t * ) ( xReceivedEvent.pvData ); 
         xTCPCheckNewClient( xSocket ); 
         break; 
    /* Other event types are processed in the same way, but are not shown 
       here. */ 
} 
Listing 5.20 Pseudo code showing how an IPStackEvent_t structure is received and processed
5.6 Receiving From Multiple Queues
5.6.1 Queue Sets
Often application designs require a single task to receive data of different sizes, data with different meanings,
and data from different sources. The previous section demonstrated how to do this in a neat and efficient way
using a single queue that receives structures. However, sometimes an application's designer is working with
constraints that limit their design choices, necessitating the use of a separate queue for some data sources. For
example, third party code being integrated into a design might assume the presence of a dedicated queue. In
such cases a 'queue set' can be used.
Queue sets allow a task to receive data from more than one queue without the task polling each queue in turn
to determine which, if any, contains data.
A design that uses a queue set to receive data from multiple sources is less neat, and less efficient, than a
design that achieves the same functionality using a single queue that receives structures. For that reason, it is
recommended to only use queue sets if design constraints make their use absolutely necessary.
The following sections describe how to use a queue set by:
Creating a queue set.
Adding queues to the set.
Semaphores can also be added to a queue set. Semaphores are described later in this book.
Reading from the queue set to determine which queues within the set contain data.
When a queue that is a member of a set receives data, the handle of the receiving queue is sent to the
queue set, and returned when a task calls a function that reads from the queue set. Therefore, if a queue
handle is returned from a queue set, then the queue referenced by the handle is known to contain data,
and the task can then read from that queue directly.
Note: If a queue is a member of a queue set then you must read from the queue each time its
handle is received from the queue set, and you must not read from the queue before its handle is
received from the queue set.

Queue set functionality is enabled by setting the configUSE_QUEUE_SETS compile time configuration constant
to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
5.6.2 The xQueueCreateSet() API Function
A queue set must be explicitly created before it can be used. At the time of writing there is no implementation
of xQueueCreateSetStatic(). However queue sets are themselves queues, so it is possible to create a set
using pre-allocated memory by using a specially crafted call to xQueueCreateStatic().
Queues sets are referenced by handles, which are variables of type QueueSetHandle_t. The
xQueueCreateSet() API function creates a queue set and returns a QueueSetHandle_t that references the
created queue set.
QueueSetHandle_t xQueueCreateSet( const UBaseType_t uxEventQueueLength); 
Listing 5.21 The xQueueCreateSet() API function prototype
xQueueCreateSet() parameters and return value
uxEventQueueLength
When a queue that is a member of a queue set receives data, the handle of the receiving queue is sent
to the queue set. uxEventQueueLength defines the maximum number of queue handles the queue set
being created can hold at any one time.
Queue handles are only sent to a queue set when a queue within the set receives data. A queue cannot
receive data if it is full, so no queue handles can be sent to the queue set if all the queues in the set are
full. Therefore, the maximum number of items the queue set will ever have to hold at one time is the
sum of the lengths of every queue in the set.
As an example, if there are three empty queues in the set, and each queue has a length of five, then in
total the queues in the set can receive fifteen items (three queues multiplied by five items each) before
all the queues in the set are full. In that example uxEventQueueLength must be set to fifteen to
guarantee the queue set can receive every item sent to it.
Semaphores can also be added to a queue set. Semaphores are covered later in this book. For the
purposes of calculating the necessary uxEventQueueLength, the length of a binary semaphore is one,
the length of a mutex is one, and the length of a counting semaphore is given by the semaphore's
maximum count value.
As another example, if a queue set will contain a queue that has a length of three, and a binary
semaphore (which has a length of one), uxEventQueueLength must be set to four (three plus one).
Return Value
If NULL is returned, then the queue set cannot be created because there is insufficient heap memory
available for FreeRTOS to allocate the queue set data structures and storage area. Chapter 3 provides
more information on the FreeRTOS heap.

If a non-NULL value is returned then the queue set was created successfully and the returned value is
the handle to the created queue set.
5.6.3 The xQueueAddToSet() API Function
xQueueAddToSet() adds a queue or semaphore to a queue set. Semaphores are described later in this book.
BaseType_t xQueueAddToSet( QueueSetMemberHandle_t xQueueOrSemaphore, 
                           QueueSetHandle_t xQueueSet ); 
Listing 5.22 The xQueueAddToSet() API function prototype
xQueueAddToSet() parameters and return value
xQueueOrSemaphore
The handle of the queue or semaphore that is being added to the queue set.
Queue handles and semaphore handles can both be cast to the QueueSetMemberHandle_t type.
xQueueSet
The handle of the queue set to which the queue or semaphore is being added.
Return Value
There are two possible return values:
1. pdPASS
This indicates the queue set was created successfully.
2. pdFAIL
This indicates the queue or semaphore could not be added to the queue set.
Queues and binary semaphores can only be added to a set when they are empty. Counting semaphores
can only be added to a set when their count is zero. Queues and semaphores can only be a member of
one set at a time.
5.6.4 The xQueueSelectFromSet() API Function
xQueueSelectFromSet() reads a queue handle from the queue set.
When a queue or semaphore that is a member of a set receives data, the handle of the receiving queue or
semaphore is sent to the queue set, and returned when a task calls xQueueSelectFromSet(). If a handle is
returned from a call to xQueueSelectFromSet() then the queue or semaphore referenced by the handle is
known to contain data and the calling task must then read from the queue or semaphore directly.
Note: Do not read data from a queue or semaphore that is a member of a set unless the handle of the
queue or semaphore has first been returned from a call to xQueueSelectFromSet(). Only read one item

from a queue or semaphore each time the queue handle or semaphore handle is returned from a call to
xQueueSelectFromSet().
QueueSetMemberHandle_t xQueueSelectFromSet( QueueSetHandle_t xQueueSet, 
                                            const TickType_t xTicksToWait ); 
Listing 5.23 The xQueueSelectFromSet() API function prototype
xQueueSelectFromSet() parameters and return value
xQueueSet
The handle of the queue set from which a queue handle or semaphore handle is being received (read).
The queue set handle will have been returned from the call to xQueueCreateSet() used to create the
queue set.
xTicksToWait
The maximum amount of time the calling task should remain in the Blocked state to wait to receive a
queue or semaphore handle from the queue set, if all the queues and semaphore in the set are empty.
If xTicksToWait is zero then xQueueSelectFromSet() will return immediately if all the queues and
semaphores in the set are empty.
The block time is specified in tick periods, so the absolute time it represents is dependent on the tick
frequency. The macro pdMS_TO_TICKS() can be used to convert a time specified in milliseconds to a
time specified in ticks.
Setting xTicksToWait to portMAX_DELAY will cause the task to wait indefinitely (without timing out)
provided INCLUDE_vTaskSuspend is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
Return Value
A return value that is not NULL will be the handle of a queue or semaphore that is known to contain
data. If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero), then it is possible the calling task was
placed into the Blocked state to wait for data to become available from a queue or semaphore in the
set, but a handle was successfully read from the queue set before the block time expired. Handles are
returned as a QueueSetMemberHandle_t type, which can be cast to either a QueueHandle_t type or
SemaphoreHandle_t type.
If the return value is NULL then a handle could not be read from the queue set. If a block time was
specified (xTicksToWait was not zero) then the calling task was placed in the Blocked state to wait for
another task or interrupt to send data to a queue or semaphore in the set, but the block time expired
before that happened.
Example 5.3 *Using a Queue Set
This example creates two sending tasks and one receiving task. The sending tasks send data to the receiving
task on two separate queues, one queue for each task. The two queues are added to a queue set, and the

receiving task reads from the queue set to determine which of the two queues contain data.
The tasks, queues, and the queue set are all created in main()—see Listing 5.24 for its implementation.
/* Declare two variables of type QueueHandle_t. Both queues are added 
   to the same queue set. */
static QueueHandle_t xQueue1 = NULL, xQueue2 = NULL; 
/* Declare a variable of type QueueSetHandle_t. This is the queue set 
   to which the two queues are added. */
static QueueSetHandle_t xQueueSet = NULL; 
int main( void )
{ 
    /* Create the two queues, both of which send character pointers. The 
       priority of the receiving task is above the priority of the sending 
       tasks, so the queues will never have more than one item in them at 
       any one time*/ 
    xQueue1 = xQueueCreate( 1, sizeof( char * ) ); 
    xQueue2 = xQueueCreate( 1, sizeof( char * ) ); 
    /* Create the queue set. Two queues will be added to the set, each of 
       which can contain 1 item, so the maximum number of queue handles the 
       queue set will ever have to hold at one time is 2 (2 queues multiplied 
       by 1 item per queue). */ 
    xQueueSet = xQueueCreateSet( 1 * 2 ); 
    /* Add the two queues to the set. */ 
    xQueueAddToSet( xQueue1, xQueueSet ); 
    xQueueAddToSet( xQueue2, xQueueSet ); 
    /* Create the tasks that send to the queues. */ 
    xTaskCreate( vSenderTask1, "Sender1", 1000, NULL, 1, NULL ); 
    xTaskCreate( vSenderTask2, "Sender2", 1000, NULL, 1, NULL ); 
    /* Create the task that reads from the queue set to determine which of 
       the two queues contain data. */ 
    xTaskCreate( vReceiverTask, "Receiver", 1000, NULL, 2, NULL ); 
    /* Start the scheduler so the created tasks start executing. */ 
    vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    /* As normal, vTaskStartScheduler() should not return, so the following 
       lines will never execute. */ 
    for( ;; ); 
    return 0; 
} 
Listing 5.24 Implementation of main() for Example 5.3
The first sending task uses xQueue1 to send a character pointer to the receiving task every 100 milliseconds.
The second sending task uses xQueue2 to send a character pointer to the receiving task every 200

milliseconds. The character pointers point to a string that identifies the sending task. Listing 5.25 shows the
implementation of both tasks.
void vSenderTask1( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    const TickType_t xBlockTime = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 100 ); 
    const char * const pcMessage = "Message from vSenderTask1\r\n"; 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Block for 100ms. */ 
        vTaskDelay( xBlockTime ); 
        /* Send this task's string to xQueue1. It is not necessary to use a 
           block time, even though the queue can only hold one item. This is 
           because the priority of the task that reads from the queue is 
           higher than the priority of this task; as soon as this task writes 
           to the queue it will be pre-empted by the task that reads from the 
           queue, so the queue will already be empty again by the time the 
           call to xQueueSend() returns. The block time is set to 0. */ 
        xQueueSend( xQueue1, &pcMessage, 0 ); 
    } 
} 
/*-----------------------------------------------------------*/ 
void vSenderTask2( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    const TickType_t xBlockTime = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 200 ); 
    const char * const pcMessage = "Message from vSenderTask2\r\n"; 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Block for 200ms. */ 
        vTaskDelay( xBlockTime ); 
        /* Send this task's string to xQueue2. It is not necessary to use a 
           block time, even though the queue can only hold one item. This is 
           because the priority of the task that reads from the queue is 
           higher than the priority of this task; as soon as this task writes 
           to the queue it will be pre-empted by the task that reads from the 
           queue, so the queue will already be empty again by the time the 
           call to xQueueSend() returns. The block time is set to 0. */ 
        xQueueSend( xQueue2, &pcMessage, 0 ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 5.25 The sending tasks used in Example 5.3

The queues written to by the sending tasks are members of the same queue set. Each time a task sends to one
of the queues, the handle of the queue is sent to the queue set. The receiving task calls
xQueueSelectFromSet() to read the queue handles from the queue set. After the receiving task receives a
queue handle from the set, it knows the queue referenced by the received handle contains data, so it reads the
data from the queue directly. The data it reads from the queue is a pointer to a string, which the receiving task
prints out.
If a call to xQueueSelectFromSet() times out, it returns NULL. In Example 5.3, xQueueSelectFromSet() is
called with an indefinite block time, so it will never time out, and can only return a valid queue handle.
Therefore, the receiving task does not need to check to see if xQueueSelectFromSet() returned NULL before
using the returned value.
xQueueSelectFromSet() only returns a queue handle if the queue referenced by the handle contains data, so
it is not necessary to use a block time when reading from the queue.
Listing 5.26 shows the implementation of the receive task.
void vReceiverTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    QueueHandle_t xQueueThatContainsData; 
    char *pcReceivedString; 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Block on the queue set to wait for one of the queues in the set to 
           contain data. Cast the QueueSetMemberHandle_t value returned from 
           xQueueSelectFromSet() to a QueueHandle_t, as it is known all the 
           members of the set are queues (the queue set does not contain any 
           semaphores). */ 
        xQueueThatContainsData = ( QueueHandle_t ) xQueueSelectFromSet( 
                                                     xQueueSet, portMAX_DELAY ); 
        /* An indefinite block time was used when reading from the queue set, 
           so xQueueSelectFromSet() will not have returned unless one of the 
           queues in the set contained data, and xQueueThatContainsData cannot 
           be NULL. Read from the queue. It is not necessary to specify a 
           block time because it is known the queue contains data. The block 
           time is set to 0. */ 
        xQueueReceive( xQueueThatContainsData, &pcReceivedString, 0 ); 
        /* Print the string received from the queue. */ 
        vPrintString( pcReceivedString ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 5.26 The receive task used in Example 5.3
Figure 5.7 shows the output produced by Example 5.3. It can be seen that the receiving task receives strings
from both sending tasks. The block time used by vSenderTask1() is half of the block time used by

vSenderTask2(), which causes the strings sent by vSenderTask1() to print out twice as often as those sent
by vSenderTask2().
Figure 5.7 The output produced when Example 5.3 is executed
5.6.5 More Realistic Queue Set Use Cases
Example 5.3 demonstrated a very simplistic case; the queue set only contained queues, and the two queues it
contained were both used to send a character pointer. In a real application, a queue set might contain both
queues and semaphores, and the queues might not all hold the same data type. When this is the case, it is
necessary to test the value returned by xQueueSelectFromSet(), before using the returned value. Listing 5.27
demonstrates how to use the value returned from xQueueSelectFromSet() when the set has the following
members:
A binary semaphore.
A queue from which character pointers are read.
A queue from which uint32_t values are read.
Listing 5.27 assumes the queues and semaphore have already been created and added to the queue set.
/* The handle of the queue from which character pointers are received. */ 
QueueHandle_t xCharPointerQueue; 
/* The handle of the queue from which uint32_t values are received. */ 
QueueHandle_t xUint32tQueue; 
/* The handle of the binary semaphore. */ 
SemaphoreHandle_t xBinarySemaphore; 
/* The queue set to which the two queues and the binary semaphore belong. */ 
QueueSetHandle_t xQueueSet;

void vAMoreRealisticReceiverTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    QueueSetMemberHandle_t xHandle; 
    char *pcReceivedString; 
    uint32_t ulRecievedValue; 
    const TickType_t xDelay100ms = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 100 ); 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Block on the queue set for a maximum of 100ms to wait for one of the 
           members of the set to contain data. */ 
        xHandle = xQueueSelectFromSet( xQueueSet, xDelay100ms ); 
        /* Test the value returned from xQueueSelectFromSet(). If the returned 
           value is NULL then the call to xQueueSelectFromSet() timed out. If 
           the returned value is not NULL then the returned value will be the 
           handle of one of the set's members. The QueueSetMemberHandle_t 
           value can be cast to either a QueueHandle_t or a SemaphoreHandle_t. 
           Whether an explicit cast is required depends on the compiler. */ 
        if( xHandle == NULL ) 
        { 
            /* The call to xQueueSelectFromSet() timed out. */ 
        } 
        else if( xHandle == ( QueueSetMemberHandle_t ) xCharPointerQueue ) 
        { 
            /* The call to xQueueSelectFromSet() returned the handle of the 
               queue that receives character pointers. Read from the queue. 
               The queue is known to contain data, so a block time of 0 is 
               used. */ 
            xQueueReceive( xCharPointerQueue, &pcReceivedString, 0 ); 
            /* The received character pointer can be processed here... */ 
        } 
        else if( xHandle == ( QueueSetMemberHandle_t ) xUint32tQueue ) 
        { 
            /* The call to xQueueSelectFromSet() returned the handle of the 
               queue that receives uint32_t types. Read from the queue. The 
               queue is known to contain data, so a block time of 0 is used. */ 
            xQueueReceive(xUint32tQueue, &ulRecievedValue, 0 ); 
            /* The received value can be processed here... */ 
        } 
        else if( xHandle == ( QueueSetMemberHandle_t ) xBinarySemaphore ) 
        { 
            /* The call to xQueueSelectFromSet() returned the handle of the 
               binary semaphore. Take the semaphore now. The semaphore is 
               known to be available so a block time of 0 is used. */ 
            xSemaphoreTake( xBinarySemaphore, 0 ); 
            /* Whatever processing is necessary when the semaphore is taken 
               can be performed here... */ 
        }

} 
} 
Listing 5.27 Using a queue set that contains queues and semaphores
5.7 Using a Queue to Create a Mailbox
There is no consensus on terminology within the embedded community, and 'mailbox' will mean different
things in different RTOSes. In this book, the term mailbox is used to refer to a queue that has a length of one. A
queue may be described as a mailbox because of the way it is used in the application, rather than because it
has a functional difference to a queue:
A queue is used to send data from one task to another task, or from an interrupt service routine to a
task. The sender places an item in the queue, and the receiver removes the item from the queue. The
data passes through the queue from the sender to the receiver.
A mailbox is used to hold data that can be read by any task, or any interrupt service routine. The data
does not pass through the mailbox, but instead remains in the mailbox until it is overwritten. The sender
overwrites the value in the mailbox. The receiver reads the value from the mailbox, but does not remove
the value from the mailbox.
This chapter describes two queue API functions that enable a queue to be used as a mailbox.
Listing 5.28 shows how a queue is created for use as a mailbox.
/* A mailbox can hold a fixed size data item. The size of the data item is set 
   when the mailbox (queue) is created. In this example the mailbox is created 
   to hold an Example_t structure. Example_t includes a time stamp to allow the 
   data held in the mailbox to note the time at which the mailbox was last 
   updated. The time stamp used in this example is for demonstration purposes 
   only - a mailbox can hold any data the application writer wants, and the 
   data does not need to include a time stamp. */
typedef struct xExampleStructure 
{ 
    TickType_t xTimeStamp; 
    uint32_t ulValue; 
} Example_t; 
/* A mailbox is a queue, so its handle is stored in a variable of type 
   QueueHandle_t. */ 
QueueHandle_t xMailbox; 
void vAFunction( void )
{ 
    /* Create the queue that is going to be used as a mailbox. The queue has 
       a length of 1 to allow it to be used with the xQueueOverwrite() API 
       function, which is described below. */ 
    xMailbox = xQueueCreate( 1, sizeof( Example_t ) ); 
}

Listing 5.28 A queue being created for use as a mailbox
5.7.1 The xQueueOverwrite() API Function
Like the xQueueSendToBack() API function, the xQueueOverwrite() API function sends data to a queue.
Unlike xQueueSendToBack(), if the queue is already full, then xQueueOverwrite() overwrites data that is
already in the queue.
xQueueOverwrite() must only be used with queues that have a length of one. The overwrite mode will always
write to the front of the queue and update the front of queue pointer, but it will not update the messages
waiting. If configASSERT is defined, an assert will occur if the queue has a length > 1.
Note: Never call xQueueOverwrite() from an interrupt service routine. The interrupt-safe version
xQueueOverwriteFromISR() should be used in its place.
BaseType_t xQueueOverwrite( QueueHandle_t xQueue, const void * pvItemToQueue ); 
Listing 5.29 The xQueueOverwrite() API function prototype
xQueueOverwrite() parameters and return value
xQueue
The handle of the queue to which the data is being sent (written). The queue handle will have been
returned from the call to xQueueCreate() or xQueueCreateStatic() used to create the queue.
pvItemToQueue
A pointer to the data to be copied into the queue.
The size of each item that the queue can hold is set when the queue is created, so this many bytes will
be copied from pvItemToQueue into the queue storage area.
Return value
xQueueOverwrite() writes to the queue even when the queue is full, so pdPASS is the only possible
return value.
Listing 5.30 shows how xQueueOverwrite() is used to write to the mailbox (queue) created in Listing 5.28.
void vUpdateMailbox( uint32_t ulNewValue )
{ 
    /* Example_t was defined in Listing 5.28. */ 
    Example_t xData; 
    /* Write the new data into the Example_t structure.*/ 
    xData.ulValue = ulNewValue; 
    /* Use the RTOS tick count as the time stamp stored in the Example_t 
       structure. */ 
    xData.xTimeStamp = xTaskGetTickCount();

/* Send the structure to the mailbox - overwriting any data that is 
       already in the mailbox. */ 
    xQueueOverwrite( xMailbox, &xData ); 
} 
Listing 5.30 Using the xQueueOverwrite() API function
5.7.2 The xQueuePeek() API Function
xQueuePeek() receives (reads) an item from a queue without removing the item from the queue.
xQueuePeek() receives data from the head of the queue without modifying the data stored in the queue, or
the order in which data is stored in the queue.
Note: Never call xQueuePeek() from an interrupt service routine. The interrupt-safe version
xQueuePeekFromISR() should be used in its place.
xQueuePeek() has the same function parameters and return value as xQueueReceive().
BaseType_t xQueuePeek( QueueHandle_t xQueue, 
                       void * const pvBuffer, 
                       TickType_t xTicksToWait ); 
Listing 5.31 The xQueuePeek() API function prototype
Listing 5.32 shows xQueuePeek() being used to receive the item posted to the mailbox (queue) in Listing 5.30.
BaseType_t vReadMailbox( Example_t *pxData )
{ 
    TickType_t xPreviousTimeStamp; 
    BaseType_t xDataUpdated; 
    /* This function updates an Example_t structure with the latest value 
       received from the mailbox. Record the time stamp already contained in 
       *pxData before it gets overwritten by the new data. */ 
    xPreviousTimeStamp = pxData->xTimeStamp; 
    /* Update the Example_t structure pointed to by pxData with the data 
       contained in the mailbox. If xQueueReceive() was used here then the 
       mailbox would be left empty, and the data could not then be read by 
       any other tasks. Using xQueuePeek() instead of xQueueReceive() ensures 
       the data remains in the mailbox. 
       A block time is specified, so the calling task will be placed in the 
       Blocked state to wait for the mailbox to contain data should the mailbox 
       be empty. An infinite block time is used, so it is not necessary to 
       check the value returned from xQueuePeek(), as xQueuePeek() will only 
       return when data is available. */ 
    xQueuePeek( xMailbox, pxData, portMAX_DELAY );

/* Return pdTRUE if the value read from the mailbox has been updated since 
       this function was last called. Otherwise return pdFALSE. */ 
    if( pxData->xTimeStamp > xPreviousTimeStamp ) 
    { 
        xDataUpdated = pdTRUE; 
    } 
    else 
    { 
        xDataUpdated = pdFALSE; 
    } 
    return xDataUpdated; 
} 
Listing 5.32 Using the xQueuePeek() API function

