# 第六章：软件定时器

6 Software Timer Management
6.1 Chapter Introduction and Scope
Software timers are used to schedule the execution of a function at a set time in the future, or periodically with
a fixed frequency. The function executed by the software timer is called the software timer's callback function.
Software timers are implemented by, and are under the control of, the FreeRTOS kernel. They do not require
hardware support, and are not related to hardware timers or hardware counters.
Note that, in line with the FreeRTOS philosophy of using innovative design to ensure maximum efficiency,
software timers do not use any processing time unless a software timer callback function is actually executing.
Software timer functionality is optional. To include software timer functionality:
1. Build the FreeRTOS source file FreeRTOS/Source/timers.c as part of your project.
2. Define the constants detailed below in the application's FreeRTOSConfig.h header file :
configUSE_TIMERS
Set configUSE_TIMERS to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
configTIMER_TASK_PRIORITY
Sets the priority of the timer service task between 0 and ( configMAX_PRIORITIES - 1 ).
configTIMER_QUEUE_LENGTH
Sets the maximum number of unprocessed commands that the timer command queue can hold at any
one time.
configTIMER_TASK_STACK_DEPTH
Sets the size of the stack (in words, not bytes) allocated to the timer service task.
6.1.1 Scope
This chapter covers:
The characteristics of a software timer compared to the characteristics of a task.
The RTOS daemon task.
The timer command queue.
The difference between a one shot software timer and a periodic software timer.
How to create, start, reset and change the period of a software timer.
6.2 Software Timer Callback Functions
Software timer callback functions are implemented as C functions. The only thing special about them is their
prototype, which must return void, and take a handle to a software timer as its only parameter. The callback
function prototype is demonstrated by Listing 6.1.

void ATimerCallback( TimerHandle_t xTimer ); 
Listing 6.1 The software timer callback function prototype
Software timer callback functions execute from start to finish, and exit in the normal way. They should be kept
short, and must not enter the Blocked state.
Note: As will be seen, software timer callback functions execute in the context of a task that is created
automatically when the FreeRTOS scheduler is started. Therefore, it is essential that software timer
callback functions never call FreeRTOS API functions that will result in the calling task entering the
Blocked state. It is ok to call functions such as xQueueReceive(), but only if the function's xTicksToWait
parameter (which specifies the function's block time) is set to 0. It is not ok to call functions such as
vTaskDelay(), as calling vTaskDelay() will always place the calling task into the Blocked state.
6.3 Attributes and States of a Software Timer
6.3.1 Period of a Software Timer
A software timer's 'period' is the time between the software timer being started, and the software timer's
callback function executing.
6.3.2 One-shot and Auto-reload Timers
There are two types of software timer:
1. One-shot timers
Once started, a one-shot timer will execute its callback function once only. A one-shot timer can be
restarted manually, but will not restart itself.
2. Auto-reload timers
Once started, an auto-reload timer will re-start itself each time it expires, resulting in periodic execution
of its callback function.
Figure 6.1 shows the difference in behavior between a one-shot timer and an auto-reload timer. The dashed
vertical lines mark the times at which a tick interrupt occurs.

Figure 6.1 The difference in behavior between one-shot and auto-reload software timers
Referring to Figure 6.1:
Timer 1
Timer 1 is a one-shot timer that has a period of 6 ticks. It is started at time t1, so its callback function
executes 6 ticks later, at time t7. As timer 1 is a one-shot timer, its callback function does not execute
again.
Timer 2
Timer 2 is an auto-reload timer that has a period of 5 ticks. It is started at time t1, so its callback function
executes every 5 ticks after time t1. In Figure 6.1 this is at times t6, t11 and t16.
6.3.3 Software Timer States
A software timer can be in one of the following two states:
Dormant
A Dormant software timer exists, and can be referenced by its handle, but is not running, so its callback
functions will not execute.
Running
A Running software timer will execute its callback function after a time equal to its period has elapsed
since the software timer entered the Running state, or since the software timer was last reset.
Figure 6.2 and Figure 6.3 show the possible transitions between the Dormant and Running states for an auto-
reload timer and a one-shot timer respectively. The key difference between the two diagrams is the state
entered after the timer has expired; the auto-reload timer executes its callback function then re-enters the
Running state, the one-shot timer executes its callback function then enters the Dormant state.

Figure 6.2 Auto-reload software timer states and transitions
Figure 6.3 One-shot software timer states and transitions
The xTimerDelete() API function deletes a timer. A timer can be deleted at any time. The function prototype
is demonstrated by Listing 6.2.
BaseType_t xTimerDelete( TimerHandle_t xTimer, TickType_t xTicksToWait ); 
Listing 6.2 The xTimerDelete() API function prototype
xTimerDelete() parameters and return value
xTimer
The handle of the timer being deleted.
xTicksToWait

Specifies the time, in ticks, that the calling task should be held in the Blocked state to wait for the delete
command to be successfully sent to the timer command queue, should the queue already be full when
xTimerDelete() was called. xTicksToWait is ignored if xTimerDelete() is called before the scheduler is
started.
Return value
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
pdPASS will be returned if the command was successfully sent to the timer command queue.
pdFAIL
pdFAIL will be returned if the delete command could not be sent to the timer command queue
even after xBlockTime ticks had passed.
6.4 The Context of a Software Timer
6.4.1 The RTOS Daemon (Timer Service) Task
All software timer callback functions execute in the context of the same RTOS daemon (or 'timer service')
task[^10].
[^10]: The task used to be called the 'timer service task', because originally it was only used to execute
software timer callback functions. Now the same task is used for other purposes too, so it is known by the
more generic name of the 'RTOS daemon task'.
The daemon task is a standard FreeRTOS task that is created automatically when the scheduler is started. Its
priority and stack size are set by the configTIMER_TASK_PRIORITY and configTIMER_TASK_STACK_DEPTH
compile time configuration constants respectively. Both constants are defined within FreeRTOSConfig.h.
Software timer callback functions must not call FreeRTOS API functions that will result in the calling task
entering the Blocked state, as to do so will result in the daemon task entering the Blocked state.
6.4.2 The Timer Command Queue
Software timer API functions send commands from the calling task to the daemon task on a queue called the
'timer command queue'. This is shown in Figure 6.4. Examples of commands include 'start a timer', 'stop a
timer' and 'reset a timer'.
The timer command queue is a standard FreeRTOS queue that is created automatically when the scheduler is
started. The length of the timer command queue is set by the configTIMER_QUEUE_LENGTH compile time
configuration constant in FreeRTOSConfig.h.

Figure 6.4 The timer command queue being used by a software timer API function to communicate with the
RTOS daemon task
6.4.3 Daemon Task Scheduling
The daemon task is scheduled like any other FreeRTOS task; it will only process commands, or execute timer
callback functions, when it is the highest priority task that is able to run. Figure 6.5 and Figure 6.6 demonstrate
how the configTIMER_TASK_PRIORITY setting affects the execution pattern.
Figure 6.5 shows the execution pattern when the priority of the daemon task is below the priority of a task that
calls the xTimerStart() API function.
pattern when the priority of a task calling xTimerStart() is above the priority of the daemon task
 Figure 6.5 The execution

Referring to Figure 6.5, in which the priority of Task 1 is higher than the priority of the daemon task, and the
priority of the daemon task is higher than the priority of the Idle task:
1. At time t1
Task 1 is in the Running state, and the daemon task is in the Blocked state.
The daemon task will leave the Blocked state if a command is sent to the timer command queue, in
which case it will process the command, or if a software timer expires, in which case it will execute the
software timer's callback function.
2. At time t2
Task 1 calls xTimerStart().
xTimerStart() sends a command to the timer command queue, causing the daemon task to leave the
Blocked state. The priority of Task 1 is higher than the priority of the daemon task, so the daemon task
does not pre-empt Task 1.
Task 1 is still in the Running state, and the daemon task has left the Blocked state and entered the Ready
state.
3. At time t3
Task 1 completes executing the xTimerStart() API function. Task 1 executed xTimerStart() from the
start of the function to the end of the function, without leaving the Running state.
4. At time t4
Task 1 calls an API function that results in it entering the Blocked state. The daemon task is now the
highest priority task in the Ready state, so the scheduler selects the daemon task as the task to enter the
Running state. The daemon task then starts to process the command sent to the timer command queue
by Task 1.
Note: The time at which the software timer being started will expire is calculated from the time the
'start a timer' command was sent to the timer command queue—it is not calculated from the time
the daemon task received the 'start a timer' command from the timer command queue.
5. At time t5
The daemon task has completed processing the command sent to it by Task 1, and attempts to receive
more data from the timer command queue. The timer command queue is empty, so the daemon task
re-enters the Blocked state. The daemon task will leave the Blocked state again if a command is sent to
the timer command queue, or if a software timer expires.
The Idle task is now the highest priority task in the Ready state, so the scheduler selects the Idle task as
the task to enter the Running state.
Figure 6.6 shows a similar scenario to that shown by Figure 6.5, but this time the priority of the daemon task is
above the priority of the task that calls xTimerStart().

pattern when the priority of a task calling xTimerStart() is below the priority of the daemon task
 Figure 6.6 The execution
Referring to Figure 6.6, in which the priority of the daemon task is higher than the priority of Task 1, and the
priority of the Task 1 is higher than the priority of the Idle task:
1. At time t1
As before, Task 1 is in the Running state, and the daemon task is in the Blocked state.
2. At time t2
Task 1 calls xTimerStart().
xTimerStart() sends a command to the timer command queue, causing the daemon task to leave the
Blocked state. The priority of the daemon task is higher than the priority of Task 1, so the scheduler
selects the daemon task as the task to enter the Running state.
Task 1 was pre-empted by the daemon task before it had completed executing the xTimerStart()
function, and is now in the Ready state.
The daemon task starts to process the command sent to the timer command queue by Task 1.
3. At time t3
The daemon task has completed processing the command sent to it by Task 1, and attempts to receive
more data from the timer command queue. The timer command queue is empty, so the daemon task
re-enters the Blocked state.
Task 1 is now the highest priority task in the Ready state, so the scheduler selects Task 1 as the task to
enter the Running state.
4. At time t4
Task 1 was pre-empted by the daemon task before it had completed executing the xTimerStart()
function, and only exits (returns from) xTimerStart() after it has re-entered the Running state.

5. At time t5
Task 1 calls an API function that results in it entering the Blocked state. The Idle task is now the highest
priority task in the Ready state, so the scheduler selects the Idle task as the task to enter the Running
state.
In the scenario shown by Figure 6.5, time passed between Task 1 sending a command to the timer command
queue, and the daemon task receiving and processing the command. In the scenario shown by Figure 6.6, the
daemon task had received and processed the command sent to it by Task 1 before Task 1 returned from the
function that sent the command.
Commands sent to the timer command queue contain a time stamp. The time stamp is used to account for any
time that passes between a command being sent by an application task, and the same command being
processed by the daemon task. For example, if a 'start a timer' command is sent to start a timer that has a
period of 10 ticks, the time stamp is used to ensure the timer being started expires 10 ticks after the command
was sent, not 10 ticks after the command was processed by the daemon task.
6.5 Creating and Starting a Software Timer
6.5.1 The xTimerCreate() API Function
FreeRTOS also includes the xTimerCreateStatic() function, which allocates the memory required to create a
timer statically at compile time: A software timer must be explicitly created before it can be used.
Software timers are referenced by variables of type TimerHandle_t. xTimerCreate() is used to create a
software timer and returns a TimerHandle_t to reference the software timer it creates. Software timers are
created in the Dormant state.
Software timers can be created before the scheduler is running, or from a task after the scheduler has been
started.
Section 2.5: Data Types and Coding Style Guide describes the data types and naming conventions used.
TimerHandle_t xTimerCreate( const char * const pcTimerName, 
                            const TickType_t xTimerPeriodInTicks, 
                            const BaseType_t xAutoReload, 
                            void * const pvTimerID, 
                            TimerCallbackFunction_t pxCallbackFunction ); 
Listing 6.3 The xTimerCreate() API function prototype
xTimerCreate() parameters and return value
pcTimerName
A descriptive name for the timer. This is not used by FreeRTOS in any way. It is included purely as a
debugging aid. Identifying a timer by a human readable name is much simpler than attempting to
identify it by its handle.
xTimerPeriodInTicks

The timer's period specified in ticks. The pdMS_TO_TICKS() macro can be used to convert a time
specified in milliseconds into a time specified in ticks. Cannot be 0.
xAutoReload
Set xAutoReload to pdTRUE to create an auto-reload timer. Set xAutoReload to pdFALSE to create a
one-shot timer.
pvTimerID
Each software timer has an ID value. The ID is a void pointer, and can be used by the application writer
for any purpose. The ID is particularly useful when the same callback function is used by more than one
software timer, as it can be used to provide timer specific storage. Use of a timer's ID is demonstrated in
an example in this chapter.
pvTimerID sets an initial value for the ID of the task being created.
pxCallbackFunction
Software timer callback functions are simply C functions that conform to the prototype shown in Listing
6.1. The pxCallbackFunction parameter is a pointer to the function (in effect, just the function name)
to use as the callback function for the software timer being created.
Return value
If NULL is returned, then the software timer cannot be created because there is insufficient heap
memory available for FreeRTOS to allocate the necessary data structure.
If a non-NULL value is returned it indicates that the software timer has been created successfully. The
returned value is the handle of the created timer.
Chapter 3 provides more information on heap memory management.
6.5.2 The xTimerStart() API Function
xTimerStart() is used to start a software timer that is in the Dormant state, or reset (re-start) a software
timer that is in the Running state. xTimerStop() is used to stop a software timer that is in the Running state.
Stopping a software timer is the same as transitioning the timer into the Dormant state.
xTimerStart() can be called before the scheduler is started, but when this is done, the software timer will not
actually start until the time at which the scheduler starts.
Note: Never call xTimerStart() from an interrupt service routine. The interrupt-safe version
xTimerStartFromISR() should be used in its place.
BaseType_t xTimerStart( TimerHandle_t xTimer, TickType_t xTicksToWait ); 
Listing 6.4 The xTimerStart() API function prototype
xTimerStart() parameters and return value

xTimer
The handle of the software timer being started or reset. The handle will have been returned from the call
to xTimerCreate() used to create the software timer.
xTicksToWait
xTimerStart() uses the timer command queue to send the 'start a timer' command to the daemon
task. xTicksToWait specifies the maximum amount of time the calling task should remain in the
Blocked state to wait for space to become available on the timer command queue, should the queue
already be full.
xTimerStart() will return immediately if xTicksToWait is zero and the timer command queue is
already full.
The block time is specified in tick periods, so the absolute time it represents is dependent on the tick
frequency. The macro pdMS_TO_TICKS() can be used to convert a time specified in milliseconds into a
time specified in ticks.
If INCLUDE_vTaskSuspend is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h then setting xTicksToWait to
portMAX_DELAY will result in the calling task remaining in the Blocked state indefinitely (without a
timeout) to wait for space to become available in the timer command queue.
If xTimerStart() is called before the scheduler has been started then the value of xTicksToWait is
ignored, and xTimerStart() behaves as if xTicksToWait had been set to zero.
Return value
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
pdPASS will be returned only if the 'start a timer' command was successfully sent to the timer
command queue.
If the priority of the daemon task is above the priority of the task that called xTimerStart(),
then the scheduler will ensure the start command is processed before xTimerStart() returns.
This is because the daemon task will pre-empt the task that called xTimerStart() as soon as
there is data in the timer command queue.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero), then it is possible the calling task was
placed into the Blocked state to wait for space to become available in the timer command queue
before the function returned, but data was successfully written to the timer command queue
before the block time expired.
pdFAIL
pdFAIL will be returned if the 'start a timer' command could not be written to the timer command
queue because the queue was already full.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero) then the calling task will have been
placed into the Blocked state to wait for the daemon task to make room in the timer command

queue, but the specified block time expired before that happened.
Example 6.1 Creating one-shot and auto-reload timers
This example creates and starts a one-shot timer and an auto-reload timer—as shown in Listing 6.5.
/* The periods assigned to the one-shot and auto-reload timers are 3.333 
   second and half a second respectively. */
#define mainONE_SHOT_TIMER_PERIOD pdMS_TO_TICKS( 3333 )
#define mainAUTO_RELOAD_TIMER_PERIOD pdMS_TO_TICKS( 500 ) 
int main( void )
{ 
    TimerHandle_t xAutoReloadTimer, xOneShotTimer; 
    BaseType_t xTimer1Started, xTimer2Started; 
    /* Create the one shot timer, storing the handle to the created timer in 
       xOneShotTimer. */ 
    xOneShotTimer = xTimerCreate( 
        /* Text name for the software timer - not used by FreeRTOS. */ 
                                  "OneShot", 
        /* The software timer's period in ticks. */ 
                                   mainONE_SHOT_TIMER_PERIOD, 
        /* Setting uxAutoRealod to pdFALSE creates a one-shot software timer. */ 
                                   pdFALSE, 
        /* This example does not use the timer id. */ 
                                   0, 
        /* Callback function to be used by the software timer being created. */ 
                                   prvOneShotTimerCallback ); 
    /* Create the auto-reload timer, storing the handle to the created timer 
       in xAutoReloadTimer. */ 
    xAutoReloadTimer = xTimerCreate( 
        /* Text name for the software timer - not used by FreeRTOS. */ 
                                     "AutoReload", 
        /* The software timer's period in ticks. */ 
                                     mainAUTO_RELOAD_TIMER_PERIOD, 
        /* Setting uxAutoRealod to pdTRUE creates an auto-reload timer. */ 
                                     pdTRUE, 
        /* This example does not use the timer id. */ 
                                     0, 
        /* Callback function to be used by the software timer being created. */ 
                                     prvAutoReloadTimerCallback ); 
    /* Check the software timers were created. */ 
    if( ( xOneShotTimer != NULL ) && ( xAutoReloadTimer != NULL ) ) 
    { 
        /* Start the software timers, using a block time of 0 (no block time). 
           The scheduler has not been started yet so any block time specified 
           here would be ignored anyway. */ 
        xTimer1Started = xTimerStart( xOneShotTimer, 0 ); 
        xTimer2Started = xTimerStart( xAutoReloadTimer, 0 );

/* The implementation of xTimerStart() uses the timer command queue, 
           and xTimerStart() will fail if the timer command queue gets full. 
           The timer service task does not get created until the scheduler is 
           started, so all commands sent to the command queue will stay in the 
           queue until after the scheduler has been started. Check both calls 
           to xTimerStart() passed. */ 
        if( ( xTimer1Started == pdPASS ) && ( xTimer2Started == pdPASS ) ) 
        { 
            /* Start the scheduler. */ 
            vTaskStartScheduler(); 
        } 
    } 
    /* As always, this line should not be reached. */ 
    for( ;; ); 
} 
Listing 6.5 Creating and starting the timers used in Example 6.1
The timers' callback functions just print a message each time they are called. The implementation of the one-
shot timer callback function is shown in Listing 6.6. The implementation of the auto-reload timer callback
function is shown in Listing 6.7.
static void prvOneShotTimerCallback( TimerHandle_t xTimer )
{ 
    TickType_t xTimeNow; 
    /* Obtain the current tick count. */ 
    xTimeNow = xTaskGetTickCount(); 
    /* Output a string to show the time at which the callback was executed. */ 
    vPrintStringAndNumber( "One-shot timer callback executing", xTimeNow ); 
    /* File scope variable. */ 
    ulCallCount++; 
} 
Listing 6.6 The callback function used by the one-shot timer in Example 6.1
static void prvAutoReloadTimerCallback( TimerHandle_t xTimer )
{ 
    TickType_t xTimeNow; 
    /* Obtain the current tick count. */ 
    xTimeNow = xTaskGetTickCount(); 
    /* Output a string to show the time at which the callback was executed. */ 
    vPrintStringAndNumber( "Auto-reload timer callback executing", xTimeNow);

ulCallCount++; 
} 
Listing 6.7 The callback function used by the auto-reload timer in Example 6.1
Executing this example produces the output shown in Figure 6.7. Figure 6.7 shows the auto-reload timer's
callback function executing with a fixed period of 500 ticks (mainAUTO_RELOAD_TIMER_PERIOD is set to 500 in
Listing 6.5), and the one-shot timer's callback function executing only once, when the tick count is 3333
(mainONE_SHOT_TIMER_PERIOD is set to 3333 in Listing 6.5).
Figure 6.7 The output produced when Example 6.1 is executed
6.6 The Timer ID
Each software timer has an ID, which is a tag value that can be used by the application writer for any purpose.
The ID is stored in a void pointer (void *), so it can store an integer value directly, point to any other object,
or be used as a function pointer.
An initial value is assigned to the ID when the software timer is created, after which the ID can be updated
using the vTimerSetTimerID() API function, and queried using the pvTimerGetTimerID() API function.
Unlike other software timer API functions, vTimerSetTimerID() and pvTimerGetTimerID() access the
software timer directly—they do not send a command to the timer command queue.
6.6.1 The vTimerSetTimerID() API Function
void vTimerSetTimerID( const TimerHandle_t xTimer, void *pvNewID ); 
Listing 6.8 The vTimerSetTimerID() API function prototype

vTimerSetTimerID() parameters
xTimer
The handle of the software timer being updated with a new ID value. The handle will have been returned
from the call to xTimerCreate() used to create the software timer.
pvNewID
The value to which the software timer's ID will be set.
6.6.2 The pvTimerGetTimerID() API Function
void *pvTimerGetTimerID( const TimerHandle_t xTimer ); 
Listing 6.9 The pvTimerGetTimerID() API function prototype
pvTimerGetTimerID() parameters and return value
xTimer
The handle of the software timer being queried. The handle will have been returned from the call to
xTimerCreate() used to create the software timer.
Return value
The ID of the software timer being queried.
Example 6.2 Using the callback function parameter and the software timer ID
The same callback function can be assigned to more than one software timer. When that is done, the callback
function parameter is used to determine which software timer expired.
Example 6.1 used two separate callback functions; one callback function was used by the one-shot timer, and
the other callback function was used by the auto-reload timer. Example 6.2 creates similar functionality to that
created by Example 6.1, but assigns a single callback function to both software timers.
The main() function used by Example 6.2 is almost identical to the main() function used in Example 6.1. The
only difference is where the software timers are created. This difference is shown in Listing 6.10, where
prvTimerCallback() is used as the callback function for both timers.
/* Create the one shot timer software timer, storing the handle in 
   xOneShotTimer. */ 
xOneShotTimer = xTimerCreate( "OneShot", 
                              mainONE_SHOT_TIMER_PERIOD, 
                              pdFALSE, 
                              /* The timer's ID is initialized to NULL. */ 
                              NULL, 
                              /* prvTimerCallback() is used by both timers. */ 
                              prvTimerCallback );

/* Create the auto-reload software timer, storing the handle in 
   xAutoReloadTimer */ 
xAutoReloadTimer = xTimerCreate( "AutoReload", 
                                 mainAUTO_RELOAD_TIMER_PERIOD, 
                                 pdTRUE, 
                                 /* The timer's ID is initialized to NULL. */ 
                                 NULL, 
                                 /* prvTimerCallback() is used by both timers. */ 
                                 prvTimerCallback ); 
Listing 6.10 Creating the timers used in Example 6.2
prvTimerCallback() will execute when either timer expires. The implementation of prvTimerCallback()
uses the function's parameter to determine if it was called because the one-shot timer expired, or because the
auto-reload timer expired.
prvTimerCallback() also demonstrates how to use the software timer ID as timer specific storage; each
software timer keeps a count of the number of times it has expired in its own ID, and the auto-reload timer
uses the count to stop itself the fifth time it executes.
The implementation of prvTimerCallback() is shown in Listing 6.9.
static void prvTimerCallback( TimerHandle_t xTimer )
{ 
    TickType_t xTimeNow; 
    uint32_t ulExecutionCount; 
    /* A count of the number of times this software timer has expired is 
       stored in the timer's ID. Obtain the ID, increment it, then save it as 
       the new ID value. The ID is a void pointer, so is cast to a uint32_t. */ 
    ulExecutionCount = ( uint32_t ) pvTimerGetTimerID( xTimer ); 
    ulExecutionCount++; 
    vTimerSetTimerID( xTimer, ( void * ) ulExecutionCount ); 
    /* Obtain the current tick count. */ 
    xTimeNow = xTaskGetTickCount(); 
    /* The handle of the one-shot timer was stored in xOneShotTimer when the 
       timer was created. Compare the handle passed into this function with 
       xOneShotTimer to determine if it was the one-shot or auto-reload timer 
       that expired, then output a string to show the time at which the 
       callback was executed. */ 
    if( xTimer == xOneShotTimer ) 
    { 
        vPrintStringAndNumber( "One-shot timer callback executing", xTimeNow ); 
    } 
    else 
    { 
        /* xTimer did not equal xOneShotTimer, so it must have been the 
           auto-reload timer that expired. */ 
        vPrintStringAndNumber( "Auto-reload timer callback executing", xTimeNow);

if( ulExecutionCount == 5 ) 
        { 
            /* Stop the auto-reload timer after it has executed 5 times. This 
               callback function executes in the context of the RTOS daemon 
               task so must not call any functions that might place the daemon 
               task into the Blocked state. Therefore a block time of 0 is 
               used. */ 
            xTimerStop( xTimer, 0 ); 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 6.11 The timer callback function used in Example 6.2
The output produced by Example 6.2 is shown in Figure 6.8. It can be seen that the auto-reload timer only
executes five times.
Figure 6.8 The output produced when Example 6.2 is executed
6.7 Changing the Period of a Timer
Every official FreeRTOS port is provided with one or more example projects. Most example projects are self-
checking, and an LED is used to give visual feedback of the project's status; if the self-checks have always
passed then the LED is toggled slowly, if a self-check has ever failed then the LED is toggled quickly.
Some example projects perform the self-checks in a task, and use the vTaskDelay() function to control the
rate at which the LED toggles. Other example projects perform the self-checks in a software timer callback
function, and use the timer's period to control the rate at which the LED toggles.
6.7.1 The xTimerChangePeriod() API Function
The period of a software timer is changed using the xTimerChangePeriod() function.

If xTimerChangePeriod() is used to change the period of a timer that is already running, then the timer will
use the new period value to recalculate its expiry time. The recalculated expiry time is relative to when
xTimerChangePeriod() was called, not relative to when the timer was originally started.
If xTimerChangePeriod() is used to change the period of a timer that is in the Dormant state (a timer that is
not running), then the timer will calculate an expiry time, and transition to the Running state (the timer will
start running).
Note: Never call xTimerChangePeriod() from an interrupt service routine. The interrupt-safe version
xTimerChangePeriodFromISR() should be used in its place.
BaseType_t xTimerChangePeriod( TimerHandle_t xTimer, 
                               TickType_t xNewPeriod, 
                               TickType_t xTicksToWait ); 
Listing 6.12 The xTimerChangePeriod() API function prototype
xTimerChangePeriod() parameters and return value
xTimer
The handle of the software timer being updated with a new period value. The handle will have been
returned from the call to xTimerCreate() used to create the software timer.
xTimerPeriodInTicks
The new period for the software timer, specified in ticks. The pdMS_TO_TICKS() macro can be used to
convert a time specified in milliseconds into a time specified in ticks.
xTicksToWait
xTimerChangePeriod() uses the timer command queue to send the 'change period' command to the
daemon task. xTicksToWait specifies the maximum amount of time the calling task should remain in
the Blocked state to wait for space to become available on the timer command queue, if the queue is
already full.
xTimerChangePeriod() will return immediately if xTicksToWait is zero and the timer command
queue is already full.
The macro pdMS_TO_TICKS() can be used to convert a time specified in milliseconds into a time
specified in ticks.
If INCLUDE_vTaskSuspend is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h, then setting xTicksToWait to
portMAX_DELAY will result in the calling task remaining in the Blocked state indefinitely (without a
timeout) to wait for space to become available in the timer command queue.
If xTimerChangePeriod() is called before the scheduler has been started, then the value of
xTicksToWait is ignored, and xTimerChangePeriod() behaves as if xTicksToWait had been set to
zero.
Returned value

There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
pdPASS will be returned only if data was successfully sent to the timer command queue.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero), then it is possible the calling task was
placed into the Blocked state to wait for space to become available in the timer command queue
before the function returned, but data was successfully written to the timer command queue
before the block time expired.
pdFAIL
pdFAIL will be returned if the 'change period' command could not be written to the timer
command queue because the queue was already full.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero) then the calling task will have been
placed into the Blocked state to wait for the daemon task to make room in the queue, but the
specified block time expired before that happened.
Listing 6.13 shows how the FreeRTOS examples that include self-checking functionality in a software timer
callback function use xTimerChangePeriod() to increase the rate at which an LED toggles if a self-check fails.
The software timer that performs the self-checks is referred to as the 'check timer'.
/* The check timer is created with a period of 3000 milliseconds, resulting 
   in the LED toggling every 3 seconds. If the self-checking functionality 
   detects an unexpected state, then the check timer's period is changed to 
   just 200 milliseconds, resulting in a much faster toggle rate. */
const TickType_t xHealthyTimerPeriod = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 3000 ); 
const TickType_t xErrorTimerPeriod = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 200 ); 
/* The callback function used by the check timer. */
static void prvCheckTimerCallbackFunction( TimerHandle_t xTimer )
{ 
    static BaseType_t xErrorDetected = pdFALSE; 
    if( xErrorDetected == pdFALSE ) 
    { 
        /* No errors have yet been detected. Run the self-checking function 
           again. The function asks each task created by the example to report 
           its own status, and also checks that all the tasks are actually 
           still running (and so able to report their status correctly). */ 
        if( CheckTasksAreRunningWithoutError() == pdFAIL ) 
        { 
            /* One or more tasks reported an unexpected status. An error might 
               have occurred. Reduce the check timer's period to increase the 
               rate at which this callback function executes, and in so doing 
               also increase the rate at which the LED is toggled. This 
               callback function is executing in the context of the RTOS daemon 
               task, so a block time of 0 is used to ensure the Daemon task 
               never enters the Blocked state. */ 
            xTimerChangePeriod(

xTimer,            /* The timer being updated */ 
                  xErrorTimerPeriod, /* The new period for the timer */ 
                  0 );               /* Do not block when sending this command */ 
        } 
        /* Latch that an error has already been detected. */ 
        xErrorDetected = pdTRUE; 
    } 
    /* Toggle the LED. The rate at which the LED toggles will depend on how 
       often this function is called, which is determined by the period of the 
       check timer. The timer's period will have been reduced from 3000ms to 
       just 200ms if CheckTasksAreRunningWithoutError() has ever returned 
       pdFAIL. */ 
    ToggleLED(); 
} 
Listing 6.13 Using xTimerChangePeriod()
6.8 Resetting a Software Timer
Resetting a software timer means to re-start the timer; the timer's expiry time is recalculated to be relative to
when the timer was reset, rather than when the timer was originally started. This is demonstrated by Figure 6.9,
which shows a timer that has a period of 6 being started, then reset twice, before eventually expiring and
executing its callback function.
Figure 6.9 Starting and resetting a software timer that has a period of 6 ticks
Referring to Figure 6.9:
Timer 1 is started at time t1. It has a period of 6, so the time at which it will execute its callback function
is originally calculated to be t7, which is 6 ticks after it was started.
Timer 1 is reset before time t7 is reached, so before it had expired and executed its callback function.
Timer 1 is reset at time t5, so the time at which it will execute its callback function is re-calculated to be

t11, which is 6 ticks after it was reset.
Timer 1 is reset again before time t11, so again before it had expired and executed its callback function.
Timer 1 is reset at time t9, so the time at which it will execute its callback function is re-calculated to be
t15, which is 6 ticks after it was last reset.
Timer 1 is not reset again, so it expires at time t15, and its callback function is executed accordingly.
6.8.1 The xTimerReset() API Function
A timer is reset using the xTimerReset() API function.
xTimerReset() can also be used to start a timer that is in the Dormant state.
Note: Never call xTimerReset() from an interrupt service routine. The interrupt-safe version
xTimerResetFromISR() should be used in its place.
BaseType_t xTimerReset( TimerHandle_t xTimer, TickType_t xTicksToWait ); 
Listing 6.14 The xTimerReset() API function prototype
xTimerReset() parameters and return value
xTimer
The handle of the software timer being reset or started. The handle will have been returned from the call
to xTimerCreate() used to create the software timer.
xTicksToWait
xTimerChangePeriod() uses the timer command queue to send the 'reset' command to the daemon
task. xTicksToWait specifies the maximum amount of time the calling task should remain in the
Blocked state to wait for space to become available on the timer command queue, if the queue is
already full.
xTimerReset() will return immediately if xTicksToWait is zero and the timer command queue is
already full.
If INCLUDE_vTaskSuspend is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h then setting xTicksToWait to
portMAX_DELAY will result in the calling task remaining in the Blocked state indefinitely (without a
timeout) to wait for space to become available in the timer command queue.
Returned value
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
pdPASS will be returned only if data was successfully sent to the timer command queue.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero), then it is possible the calling task was
placed into the Blocked state to wait for space to become available in the timer command queue

before the function returned, but data was successfully written to the timer command queue
before the block time expired.
pdFAIL
pdFAIL will be returned if the 'reset' command could not be written to the timer command queue
because the queue was already full.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero) then the calling task will have been
placed into the Blocked state to wait for the daemon task to make room in the queue, but the
specified block time expired before that happened.
Example 6.3 Resetting a software timer
This example simulates the behavior of the backlight on a cell phone. The backlight:
Turns on when a key is pressed.
Remains on provided further keys are pressed within a certain time period.
Automatically turns off if no key presses are made within a certain time period.
A one-shot software timer is used to implement this behavior:
The [simulated] backlight is turned on when a key is pressed, and turned off in the software timer's
callback function.
The software timer is reset each time a key is pressed.
The time period during which a key must be pressed to prevent the backlight being turned off is
therefore equal to the period of the software timer; if the software timer is not reset by a key press
before the timer expires, then the timer's callback function executes, and the backlight is turned off.
The xSimulatedBacklightOn variable holds the backlight state. xSimulatedBacklightOn is set to pdTRUE to
indicate the backlight is on, and pdFALSE to indicate the backlight is off.
The software timer callback function is shown in Listing 6.15.
static void prvBacklightTimerCallback( TimerHandle_t xTimer )
{ 
    TickType_t xTimeNow = xTaskGetTickCount(); 
    /* The backlight timer expired, turn the backlight off. */ 
    xSimulatedBacklightOn = pdFALSE; 
    /* Print the time at which the backlight was turned off. */ 
    vPrintStringAndNumber( 
            "Timer expired, turning backlight OFF at time\t\t", xTimeNow ); 
} 
Listing 6.15 The callback function for the one-shot timer used in Example 6.3

Example 6.3 creates a task to poll the keyboard[^11]. The task is shown in Listing 6.16, but for the reasons
described in the next paragraph, Listing 6.16 is not intended to be representative of an optimal design.
[^11]: Printing to the Windows console, and reading keys from the Windows console, both result in the
execution of Windows system calls. Windows system calls, including use of the Windows console, disks, or
TCP/IP stack, can adversely affect the behavior of the FreeRTOS Windows port, and should normally be
avoided.*
Using FreeRTOS allows your application to be event driven. Event driven designs use processing time very
efficiently, because processing time is only used if an event has occurred, and processing time is not wasted
polling for events that have not occurred. Example 6.3 could not be made event driven because it is not
practical to process keyboard interrupts when using the FreeRTOS Windows port, so the much less efficient
polling technique had to be used instead. If Listing 6.16 was an interrupt service routine, then
xTimerResetFromISR() would be used in place of xTimerReset().
static void vKeyHitTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    const TickType_t xShortDelay = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 50 ); 
    TickType_t xTimeNow; 
    vPrintString( "Press a key to turn the backlight on.\r\n" ); 
    /* Ideally an application would be event driven, and use an interrupt to 
       process key presses. It is not practical to use keyboard interrupts 
       when using the FreeRTOS Windows port, so this task is used to poll for 
       a key press. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Has a key been pressed? */ 
        if( _kbhit() != 0 ) 
        { 
            /* A key has been pressed. Record the time. */ 
            xTimeNow = xTaskGetTickCount(); 
            if( xSimulatedBacklightOn == pdFALSE ) 
            { 
                /* The backlight was off, so turn it on and print the time at 
                   which it was turned on. */ 
                xSimulatedBacklightOn = pdTRUE; 
                vPrintStringAndNumber( 
                    "Key pressed, turning backlight ON at time\t\t", 
                    xTimeNow ); 
            } 
            else 
            { 
                /* The backlight was already on, so print a message to say the 
                   timer is about to be reset and the time at which it was 
                   reset. */ 
                vPrintStringAndNumber( 
                    "Key pressed, resetting software timer at time\t\t", 
                    xTimeNow );

} 
            /* Reset the software timer. If the backlight was previously off, 
               then this call will start the timer. If the backlight was 
               previously on, then this call will restart the timer. A real 
               application may read key presses in an interrupt. If this 
               function was an interrupt service routine then 
               xTimerResetFromISR() must be used instead of xTimerReset(). */ 
            xTimerReset( xBacklightTimer, xShortDelay ); 
            /* Read and discard the key that was pressed – it is not required 
               by this simple example. */ 
            ( void ) _getch(); 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 6.16 The task used to reset the software timer in Example 6.3
The output produced when Example 6.3 is executed is shown in Figure 6.10. With reference to Figure 6.10:
The first key press occurred when the tick count was 812. At that time the backlight was turned on, and
the one-shot timer was started.
Further key presses occurred when the tick count was 1813, 3114, 4015 and 5016. All of these key
presses resulted in the timer being reset before the timer had expired.
The timer expired when the tick count was 10016. At that time the backlight was turned off.
Figure 6.10 The output produced when Example 6.3 is executed
It can be seen in Figure 6.10 that the timer had a period of 5000 ticks; the backlight was turned off exactly 5000
ticks after a key was last pressed, so 5000 ticks after the timer was last reset.

7 Interrupt Management
7.1 Introduction
7.1.1 Events
Embedded real-time systems have to take actions in response to events that originate from the environment.
For example, a packet arriving on an Ethernet peripheral (the event) might require passing it to a TCP/IP stack
for processing (the action). Non-trivial systems will have to service events that originate from multiple sources,
all of which will have different processing overhead and response time requirements. In each case, a judgment
has to be made as to the best event processing implementation strategy:
How should the event be detected? Interrupts are normally used, but inputs can also be polled.
When interrupts are used, how much processing should be performed inside the interrupt service
routine (ISR), and how much outside? It is normally desirable to keep each ISR as short as possible.
How are events communicated to the main (non-ISR) code, and how can this code be structured to best
accommodate processing of potentially asynchronous occurrences?
FreeRTOS does not impose any specific event processing strategy on the application designer, but does
provide features that allow the chosen strategy to be implemented in a simple and maintainable way.
It is important to draw a distinction between the priority of a task, and the priority of an interrupt:
A task is a software feature that is unrelated to the hardware on which FreeRTOS is running. The priority
of a task is assigned in software by the application writer, and a software algorithm (the scheduler)
decides which task will be placed in the Running state.
Although written in software, an interrupt service routine is a hardware feature because the hardware
controls which interrupt service routine will run, and when it will run. Tasks will only run when there are
no ISRs running, so the lowest priority interrupt will interrupt the highest priority task, and there is no
way for a task to pre-empt an ISR.
All architectures on which FreeRTOS will run are capable of processing interrupts, but details relating to
interrupt entry, and interrupt priority assignment, vary between architectures.
7.1.2 Scope
This chapter covers:
Which FreeRTOS API functions can be used from within an interrupt service routine.
Methods of deferring interrupt processing to a task.
How to create and use binary semaphores and counting semaphores.
The differences between binary and counting semaphores.
How to use a queue to pass data into and out of an interrupt service routine.
The interrupt nesting model available with some FreeRTOS ports.
7.2 Using the FreeRTOS API from an ISR

7.2.1 The Interrupt Safe API
Often it is necessary to use the functionality provided by a FreeRTOS API function from an interrupt service
routine (ISR), but many FreeRTOS API functions perform actions that are not valid inside an ISR. The most
notable of these is placing the task that called the API function into the Blocked state— if an API function is
called from an ISR, then it is not being called from a task, so there is no calling task that can be placed into the
Blocked state. FreeRTOS solves this problem by providing two versions of some API functions; one version for
use from tasks, and one version for use from ISRs. Functions intended for use from ISRs have "FromISR"
appended to their name.
Note: Never call a FreeRTOS API function that does not have "FromISR" in its name from an ISR.
7.2.2 The Benefits of Using a Separate Interrupt Safe API
Having a separate API for use in interrupts allows task code to be more efficient, ISR code to be more efficient,
and interrupt entry to be simpler. To see why, consider the alternative solution, which would have been to
provide a single version of each API function that could be called from both a task and an ISR. If the same
version of an API function could be called from both a task and an ISR then:
The API functions would need additional logic to determine if they had been called from a task or an
ISR. The additional logic would introduce new paths through the function, making the functions longer,
more complex, and harder to test.
Some API function parameters would be obsolete when the function was called from a task, while others
would be obsolete when the function was called from an ISR.
Each FreeRTOS port would need to provide a mechanism for determining the execution context (task or
ISR).
Architectures on which it is not easy to determine the execution context (task or ISR) would require
additional, wasteful, more complex to use, and non-standard interrupt entry code that allowed the
execution context to be provided by software.
7.2.3 The Disadvantages of Using a Separate, Interrupt Safe API
Having two versions of some API functions allows both tasks and ISRs to be more efficient, but introduces a
new problem; sometimes it is necessary to call a function that is not part of the FreeRTOS API, but makes use
of the FreeRTOS API, from both a task and an ISR.
This is normally only a problem when integrating third party code, as that is the only time when the software's
design is out of the control of the application writer. If this does become an issue, then the problem can be
overcome using one of the following techniques:
Defer interrupt processing to a task[^12], so the API function is only ever called from the context of a
task.
If you are using a FreeRTOS port that supports interrupt nesting, then use the version of the API function
that ends in "FromISR", as that version can be called from tasks and ISRs. (The reverse is not true, API
functions that do not end in "FromISR" must not be called from an ISR.)

Third party code normally includes an RTOS abstraction layer that can be implemented to test the
context from which the function is being called (task or interrupt), and then call the API function that is
appropriate for the context.
[^12]: Deferred interrupt processing is covered in the next section of this book.
7.2.4 The xHigherPriorityTaskWoken Parameter
This section introduces the concept of the xHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter. Do not be concerned if
you do not fully understand this section yet, as practical examples are provided in following sections.
If a context switch is performed by an interrupt, then the task running when the interrupt exits might be
different than the task that was running when the interrupt was entered—the interrupt will have interrupted
one task, but returned to a different task.
Some FreeRTOS API functions can move a task from the Blocked state to the Ready state. This has already been
seen with functions such as xQueueSendToBack(), which will unblock a task if there was a task waiting in the
Blocked state for data to become available on the subject queue.
If the priority of a task that is unblocked by a FreeRTOS API function is higher than the priority of the task in
the Running state, then, in accordance with the FreeRTOS scheduling policy, a switch to the higher priority task
should occur. When the switch to the higher priority task actually occurs is dependent on the context from
which the API function is called:
If the API function was called from a task:
If configUSE_PREEMPTION is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h then the switch to the higher priority task
occurs automatically within the API function, in other words, before the API function has exited. This has
already been seen in Figure 6.6, where a write to the timer command queue resulted in a switch to the
RTOS daemon task before the function that wrote to the command queue had exited.
If the API function was called from an interrupt:
A switch to a higher priority task will not occur automatically inside an interrupt. Instead, a variable is set
to inform the application writer that a context switch should be performed. Interrupt safe API functions
(those that end in "FromISR") have a pointer parameter called pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken that is
used for this purpose.
If a context switch should be performed, then the interrupt safe API function will set
*pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken to pdTRUE. To be able to detect this has happened, the variable pointed
to by pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken must be initialized to pdFALSE before it is used for the first time.
If the application writer opts not to request a context switch from the ISR, then the higher priority task
will remain in the Ready state until the next time the scheduler runs, which in the worst case will be
during the next tick interrupt.
FreeRTOS API functions can only set *pxHighPriorityTaskWoken to pdTRUE. If an ISR calls more than
one FreeRTOS API function, then the same variable can be passed as the pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken
parameter in each API function call, and the variable only needs to be initialized to pdFALSE before it is
used for the first time.

There are several reasons why context switches do not occur automatically inside the interrupt safe version of
an API function:
Avoiding unnecessary context switches
An interrupt may execute more than once before it is necessary for a task to perform any processing. For
example, consider a scenario where a task processes a string that was received by an interrupt driven
UART; it would be wasteful for the UART ISR to switch to the task each time a character was received
because the task would only have processing to perform after the complete string had been received.
Control over the execution sequence
Interrupts can occur sporadically, and at unpredictable times. Expert FreeRTOS users may want to
temporarily avoid an unpredictable switch to a different task at specific points in their application,
although this can also be achieved using the FreeRTOS scheduler locking mechanism.
Portability
It is the simplest mechanism that can be used across all FreeRTOS ports.
Efficiency
Ports that target smaller processor architectures only allow a context switch to be requested at the very
end of an ISR, and removing that restriction would require additional and more complex code. It also
allows more than one call to a FreeRTOS API function within the same ISR without generating more than
one request for a context switch within the same ISR.
Execution in the RTOS tick interrupt
As will be seen later in this book, it is possible to add application code into the RTOS tick interrupt. The
result of attempting a context switch inside the tick interrupt is dependent on the FreeRTOS port in use.
At best, it will result in an unnecessary call to the scheduler.
Use of the pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter is optional. If it is not required, then set
pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken to NULL.
7.2.5 The portYIELD_FROM_ISR() and portEND_SWITCHING_ISR() Macros
This section introduces the macros that are used to request a context switch from an ISR. Do not be concerned
if you do not fully understand this section yet, as practical examples are provided in following sections.
taskYIELD() is a macro that can be called in a task to request a context switch. portYIELD_FROM_ISR() and
portEND_SWITCHING_ISR() are both interrupt safe versions of taskYIELD(). portYIELD_FROM_ISR() and
portEND_SWITCHING_ISR() are both used in the same way, and do the same thing[^13]. Some FreeRTOS
ports only provide one of the two macros. Newer FreeRTOS ports provide both macros. The examples in this
book use portYIELD_FROM_ISR().
[^13]: Historically, portEND_SWITCHING_ISR() was the name used in FreeRTOS ports that required interrupt
handlers to use an assembly code wrapper, and portYIELD_FROM_ISR() was the name used in FreeRTOS
ports that allowed the entire interrupt handler to be written in C.

portEND_SWITCHING_ISR( xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
Listing 7.1 The portEND_SWITCHING_ISR() macros
portYIELD_FROM_ISR( xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
Listing 7.2 The portYIELD_FROM_ISR() macros
The xHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter passed out of an interrupt safe API function can be used directly
as the parameter in a call to portYIELD_FROM_ISR().
If the portYIELD_FROM_ISR() xHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter is pdFALSE (zero), then a context
switch is not requested, and the macro has no effect. If the portYIELD_FROM_ISR()
xHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter is not pdFALSE, then a context switch is requested, and the task in
the Running state might change. The interrupt will always return to the task in the Running state, even if the
task in the Running state changed while the interrupt was executing.
Most FreeRTOS ports allow portYIELD_FROM_ISR() to be called anywhere within an ISR. A few FreeRTOS
ports (predominantly those for smaller architectures), only allow portYIELD_FROM_ISR() to be called at the
very end of an ISR.
7.3 Deferred Interrupt Processing
It is normally considered best practice to keep ISRs as short as possible. Reasons for this include:
Even if tasks have been assigned a very high priority, they will only run if no interrupts are being serviced
by the hardware.
ISRs can disrupt (add 'jitter' to) both the start time, and the execution time, of a task.
Depending on the architecture on which FreeRTOS is running, it might not be possible to accept any
new interrupts, or at least a subset of new interrupts, while an ISR is executing.
The application writer needs to consider the consequences of, and guard against, resources such as
variables, peripherals, and memory buffers being accessed by a task and an ISR at the same time.
Some FreeRTOS ports allow interrupts to nest, but interrupt nesting can increase complexity and reduce
predictability. The shorter an interrupt is, the less likely it is to nest.
An interrupt service routine must record the cause of the interrupt, and clear the interrupt. Any other
processing necessitated by the interrupt can often be performed in a task, allowing the interrupt service
routine to exit as quickly as is practical. This is called 'deferred interrupt processing', because the processing
necessitated by the interrupt is 'deferred' from the ISR to a task.
Deferring interrupt processing to a task also allows the application writer to prioritize the processing relative to
other tasks in the application, and use all the FreeRTOS API functions.

If the priority of the task to which interrupt processing is deferred is above the priority of any other task, then
the processing will be performed immediately, just as if the processing had been performed in the ISR itself.
This scenario is shown in Figure 7.1, in which Task 1 is a normal application task, and Task 2 is the task to which
interrupt processing is deferred.
Figure 7.1 Completing interrupt processing in a high priority task
In Figure 7.1, interrupt processing starts at time t2, and effectively ends at time t4, but only the period between
times t2 and t3 is spent in the ISR. If deferred interrupt processing had not been used then the entire period
between times t2 and t4 would have been spent in the ISR.
There is no absolute rule as to when it is best to perform all processing necessitated by an interrupt in the ISR,
and when it is best to defer part of the processing to a task. Deferring processing to a task is most useful when:
The processing necessitated by the interrupt is not trivial. For example, if the interrupt is just storing the
result of an analog to digital conversion, then it is almost certain this is best performed inside the ISR,
but if result of the conversion must also be passed through a software filter, then it may be best to
execute the filter in a task.
It is convenient for the interrupt processing to perform an action that cannot be performed inside an
ISR, such as write to a console, or allocate memory.
The interrupt processing is not deterministic—meaning it is not known in advance how long the
processing will take.
The following sections describe and demonstrate the concepts introduced in this chapter so far, including
FreeRTOS features that can be used to implement deferred interrupt processing.
7.4 Binary Semaphores Used for Synchronization

The interrupt safe version of the Binary Semaphore API can be used to unblock a task each time a particular
interrupt occurs, effectively synchronizing the task with the interrupt. This allows the majority of the interrupt
event processing to be implemented within the synchronized task, with only a very fast and short portion
remaining directly in the ISR. As described in the previous section, the binary semaphore is used to 'defer'
interrupt processing to a task[^14].
[^14]: It is more efficient to unblock a task from an interrupt using a direct to task notification than it is using a
binary semaphore. Direct to task notifications are not covered until Chapter 10, Task Notifications.
As previously demonstrated in Figure 7.1, if the interrupt processing is particularly time critical, then the
priority of the deferred processing task can be set to ensure the task always pre-empts the other tasks in the
system. The ISR can then be implemented to include a call to portYIELD_FROM_ISR(), ensuring the ISR
returns directly to the task to which interrupt processing is being deferred. This has the effect of ensuring the
entire event processing executes contiguously (without a break) in time, just as if it had all been implemented
within the ISR itself. Figure 7.2 repeats the scenario shown in Figure 7.1, but with the text updated to describe
how the execution of the deferred processing task can be controlled using a semaphore.
Figure 7.2 Using a binary semaphore to implement deferred interrupt processing
The deferred processing task uses a blocking 'take' call to a semaphore as a means of entering the Blocked
state to wait for the event to occur. When the event occurs, the ISR uses a 'give' operation on the same
semaphore to unblock the task so that the required event processing can proceed.
'Taking a semaphore' and 'giving a semaphore' are concepts that have different meanings depending on their
usage scenario. In this interrupt synchronization scenario, the binary semaphore can be considered
conceptually as a queue with a length of one. The queue can contain a maximum of one item at any time, so is
always either empty or full (hence, binary). By calling xSemaphoreTake(), the task to which interrupt

processing is deferred effectively attempts to read from the queue with a block time, causing the task to enter
the Blocked state if the queue is empty. When the event occurs, the ISR uses the xSemaphoreGiveFromISR()
function to place a token (the semaphore) into the queue, making the queue full. This causes the task to exit
the Blocked state and remove the token, leaving the queue empty once more. When the task has completed its
processing, it once more attempts to read from the queue and, finding the queue empty, re-enters the Blocked
state to wait for the next event. This sequence is demonstrated in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3 shows the interrupt 'giving' the semaphore, even though it has not first 'taken' it, and the task
'taking' the semaphore, but never giving it back. This is why the scenario is described as being conceptually
similar to writing to and reading from a queue. It often causes confusion as it does not follow the same rules as
other semaphore usage scenarios, where a task that takes a semaphore must always give it back—such as the
scenarios described in Chapter 8, Resource Management.

Using a binary semaphore to synchronize a task with an interrupt
 Figure 7.3
7.4.1 The xSemaphoreCreateBinary() API Function

FreeRTOS also includes the xSemaphoreCreateBinaryStatic() function, which allocates the memory
required to create a binary semaphore statically at compile time: Handles to all the various types of FreeRTOS
semaphore are stored in a variable of type SemaphoreHandle_t.
Before a semaphore can be used, it must be created. To create a binary semaphore, use the
xSemaphoreCreateBinary() API function[^15].
[^15]: Some Semaphore API functions are actually macros, not functions. For simplicity, they are all referred to
as functions throughout this book.
SemaphoreHandle_t xSemaphoreCreateBinary( void ); 
Listing 7.3 The xSemaphoreCreateBinary() API function prototype
xSemaphoreCreateBinary() Return Value
Return value
If NULL is returned, then the semaphore cannot be created because there is insufficient heap memory
available for FreeRTOS to allocate the semaphore data structures.
If a non-NULL value is returned, it indicates that the semaphore has been created successfully. The
returned value should be stored as the handle to the created semaphore.
7.4.2 The xSemaphoreTake() API Function
'Taking' a semaphore means to 'obtain' or 'receive' the semaphore. The semaphore can be taken only if it is
available.
All the various types of FreeRTOS semaphore, except recursive mutexes, can be 'taken' using the
xSemaphoreTake() function.
xSemaphoreTake() must not be used from an interrupt service routine.
BaseType_t xSemaphoreTake( SemaphoreHandle_t xSemaphore, TickType_t xTicksToWait 
); 
Listing 7.4 The xSemaphoreTake() API function prototype
xSemaphoreTake() parameters and return value
xSemaphore
The semaphore being 'taken'.
A semaphore is referenced by a variable of type SemaphoreHandle_t. It must be explicitly created
before it can be used.
xTicksToWait

The maximum amount of time the task should remain in the Blocked state to wait for the semaphore if it
is not already available.
If xTicksToWait is zero, then xSemaphoreTake() will return immediately if the semaphore is not
available.
The block time is specified in tick periods, so the absolute time it represents is dependent on the tick
frequency. The macro pdMS_TO_TICKS() can be used to convert a time specified in milliseconds to a
time specified in ticks.
Setting xTicksToWait to portMAX_DELAY will cause the task to wait indefinitely (without a timeout) if
INCLUDE_vTaskSuspend is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.
Return value
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
pdPASS is returned only if the call to xSemaphoreTake() was successful in obtaining the
semaphore.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero), then it is possible that the calling task
was placed into the Blocked state to wait for the semaphore if it was not immediately available,
but the semaphore became available before the block time expired.
pdFALSE
The semaphore is not available.
If a block time was specified (xTicksToWait was not zero), then the calling task will have been
placed into the Blocked state to wait for the semaphore to become available, but the block time
expired before this happened.
7.4.3 The xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() API Function
Binary and counting semaphores[^16] can be 'given' using the xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() function.
[^16]: Counting semaphores are described in a later section of this book.
xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() is the interrupt safe version of xSemaphoreGive(), so has the
pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter that was described at the start of this chapter.
BaseType_t xSemaphoreGiveFromISR( SemaphoreHandle_t xSemaphore, 
                                  BaseType_t *pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
Listing 7.5 The xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() API function prototype
xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() parameters and return value
xSemaphore

The semaphore being 'given'.
A semaphore is referenced by a variable of type SemaphoreHandle_t, and must be explicitly created
before being used.
pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken
It is possible that a single semaphore will have one or more tasks blocked on it waiting for the
semaphore to become available. Calling xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() can make the semaphore
available, and so cause a task that was waiting for the semaphore to leave the Blocked state. If calling
xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() causes a task to leave the Blocked state, and the unblocked task has a
priority higher than the currently executing task (the task that was interrupted), then, internally,
xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() will set *pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken to pdTRUE.
If xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() sets this value to pdTRUE, then normally a context switch should be
performed before the interrupt is exited. This will ensure that the interrupt returns directly to the highest
priority Ready state task.
Return value
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
pdPASS will be returned only if the call to xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() is successful.
pdFAIL
If a semaphore is already available, it cannot be given, and xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() will
return pdFAIL.
Example 7.1 Using a binary semaphore to synchronize a task with an interrupt
This example uses a binary semaphore to unblock a task from an interrupt service routine, effectively
synchronizing the task with the interrupt.
A simple periodic task is used to generate a software interrupt every 500 milliseconds. A software interrupt is
used for convenience because of the complexity of hooking into a real interrupt in some target environments.
Listing 7.6 shows the implementation of the periodic task. Note that the task prints out a string both before
and after the interrupt is generated. This allows the sequence of execution to be observed in the output
produced when the example is executed.
/* The number of the software interrupt used in this example. The code 
   shown is from the Windows project, where numbers 0 to 2 are used by the 
   FreeRTOS Windows port itself, so 3 is the first number available to the 
   application. */
#define mainINTERRUPT_NUMBER 3 
static void vPeriodicTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    const TickType_t xDelay500ms = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 500UL );

/* As per most tasks, this task is implemented within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Block until it is time to generate the software interrupt again. */ 
        vTaskDelay( xDelay500ms ); 
        /* Generate the interrupt, printing a message both before and after 
           the interrupt has been generated, so the sequence of execution is 
           evident from the output. 
           The syntax used to generate a software interrupt is dependent on 
           the FreeRTOS port being used. The syntax used below can only be 
           used with the FreeRTOS Windows port, in which such interrupts are 
           only simulated. */ 
        vPrintString( "Periodic task - About to generate an interrupt.\r\n" ); 
        vPortGenerateSimulatedInterrupt( mainINTERRUPT_NUMBER ); 
        vPrintString( "Periodic task - Interrupt generated.\r\n\r\n\r\n" ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 7.6 Implementation of the task that periodically generates a software interrupt in Example 7.1
Listing 7.7 shows the implementation of the task to which the interrupt processing is deferred—the task that is
synchronized with the software interrupt through the use of a binary semaphore. Again, a string is printed out
on each iteration of the task, so the sequence in which the task and the interrupt execute is evident from the
output produced when the example is executed.
It should be noted that, while the code shown in Listing 7.7 is adequate for Example 7.1, where interrupts are
generated by software, it is not adequate for scenarios where interrupts are generated by hardware
peripherals. A following sub-section describes how the structure of the code needs to be changed to make it
suitable for use with hardware generated interrupts.
static void vHandlerTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Use the semaphore to wait for the event. The semaphore was created 
           before the scheduler was started, so before this task ran for the 
           first time. The task blocks indefinitely, meaning this function 
           call will only return once the semaphore has been successfully 
           obtained - so there is no need to check the value returned by 
           xSemaphoreTake(). */ 
        xSemaphoreTake( xBinarySemaphore, portMAX_DELAY ); 
        /* To get here the event must have occurred. Process the event (in 
           this Case, just print out a message). */ 
        vPrintString( "Handler task - Processing event.\r\n" ); 
    } 
}

Listing 7.7 The implementation of the task to which the interrupt processing is deferred (the task that
synchronizes with the interrupt) in Example 7.1
Listing 7.8 shows the ISR. This does very little other than 'give' the semaphore to unblock the task to which
interrupt processing is deferred.
Note how the xHigherPriorityTaskWoken variable is used. It is set to pdFALSE before calling
xSemaphoreGiveFromISR(), then used as the parameter when portYIELD_FROM_ISR() is called. A context
switch will be requested inside the portYIELD_FROM_ISR() macro if xHigherPriorityTaskWoken equals
pdTRUE.
The prototype of the ISR, and the macro called to force a context switch, are both correct for the FreeRTOS
Windows port, and may be different for other FreeRTOS ports. Refer to the port specific documentation pages
on the FreeRTOS.org website, and the examples provided in the FreeRTOS download, to find the syntax
required for the port you are using.
Unlike most architectures on which FreeRTOS runs, the FreeRTOS Windows port requires an ISR to return a
value. The implementation of the portYIELD_FROM_ISR() macro provided with the Windows port includes
the return statement, so Listing 7.8 does not show a value being returned explicitly.
static uint32_t ulExampleInterruptHandler( void )
{ 
    BaseType_t xHigherPriorityTaskWoken; 
    /* The xHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter must be initialized to 
       pdFALSE as it will get set to pdTRUE inside the interrupt safe 
       API function if a context switch is required. */ 
    xHigherPriorityTaskWoken = pdFALSE; 
    /* 'Give' the semaphore to unblock the task, passing in the address of 
       xHigherPriorityTaskWoken as the interrupt safe API function's 
       pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter. */ 
    xSemaphoreGiveFromISR( xBinarySemaphore, &xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
    /* Pass the xHigherPriorityTaskWoken value into portYIELD_FROM_ISR(). 
       If xHigherPriorityTaskWoken was set to pdTRUE inside 
       xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() then calling portYIELD_FROM_ISR() will request 
       a context switch. If xHigherPriorityTaskWoken is still pdFALSE then 
       calling portYIELD_FROM_ISR() will have no effect. Unlike most FreeRTOS 
       ports, the Windows port requires the ISR to return a value - the return 
       statement is inside the Windows version of portYIELD_FROM_ISR(). */ 
    portYIELD_FROM_ISR( xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
} 
Listing 7.8 The ISR for the software interrupt used in Example 7.1
The main() function creates the binary semaphore, creates the tasks, installs the interrupt handler, and starts
the scheduler. The implementation is shown in Listing 7.9.

The syntax of the function called to install an interrupt handler is specific to the FreeRTOS Windows port, and
may be different for other FreeRTOS ports. Refer to the port specific documentation pages on the
FreeRTOS.org website, and the examples provided in the FreeRTOS download, to find the syntax required for
the port you are using.
int main( void )
{ 
    /* Before a semaphore is used it must be explicitly created. In this 
       example a binary semaphore is created. */ 
    xBinarySemaphore = xSemaphoreCreateBinary(); 
    /* Check the semaphore was created successfully. */ 
    if( xBinarySemaphore != NULL ) 
    { 
        /* Create the 'handler' task, which is the task to which interrupt 
           processing is deferred. This is the task that will be synchronized 
           with the interrupt. The handler task is created with a high priority 
           to ensure it runs immediately after the interrupt exits. In this 
           case a priority of 3 is chosen. */ 
        xTaskCreate( vHandlerTask, "Handler", 1000, NULL, 3, NULL ); 
        /* Create the task that will periodically generate a software 
           interrupt. This is created with a priority below the handler task 
           to ensure it will get preempted each time the handler task exits 
           the Blocked state. */ 
        xTaskCreate( vPeriodicTask, "Periodic", 1000, NULL, 1, NULL ); 
        /* Install the handler for the software interrupt. The syntax necessary 
           to do this is dependent on the FreeRTOS port being used. The syntax 
           shown here can only be used with the FreeRTOS windows port, where 
           such interrupts are only simulated. */ 
        vPortSetInterruptHandler( mainINTERRUPT_NUMBER, 
                                  ulExampleInterruptHandler ); 
        /* Start the scheduler so the created tasks start executing. */ 
        vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    } 
    /* As normal, the following line should never be reached. */ 
    for( ;; ); 
} 
Listing 7.9 The implementation of main() for Example 7.1
Example 7.1 produces the output shown in Figure 7.4. As expected, vHandlerTask() enters the Running state
as soon as the interrupt is generated, so the output from the task splits the output produced by the periodic
task. Further explanation is provided in Figure 7.5.

Figure 7.4 The output produced when Example 7.1 is executed
Figure 7.5 The sequence of execution when Example 7.1 is executed
7.4.4 Improving the Implementation of the Task Used in Example 7.1
Example 7.1 used a binary semaphore to synchronize a task with an interrupt. The execution sequence was as
follows:
1. The interrupt occurred.
2. The ISR executed and 'gave' the semaphore to unblock the task.
3. The task executed immediately after the ISR, and 'took' the semaphore.

4. The task processed the event, then attempted to 'take' the semaphore again—entering the Blocked
state because the semaphore was not yet available (another interrupt had not yet occurred).
The structure of the task used in Example 7.1 is adequate only if interrupts occur at a relatively low frequency.
To understand why, consider what would happen if a second, and then a third, interrupt had occurred before
the task had completed its processing of the first interrupt:
When the second ISR executed, the semaphore would be empty, so the ISR would give the semaphore,
and the task would process the second event immediately after it had completed processing the first
event. That scenario is shown in Figure 7.6.
When the third ISR executed, the semaphore would already be available, preventing the ISR giving the
semaphore again, so the task would not know the third event had occurred. That scenario is shown in
Figure 7.7.

Figure 7.6 The scenario when one interrupt occurs before the task has finished processing the first event

scenario when two interrupts occur before the task has finished processing the first event
 Figure 7.7 The
The deferred interrupt handling task used in Example 7.1, and shown in Listing 7.7, is structured so that it only
processes one event between each call to xSemaphoreTake(). That was adequate for Example 7.1, because

the interrupts that generated the events were triggered by software, and occurred at a predictable time. In real
applications, interrupts are generated by hardware, and occur at unpredictable times. Therefore, to minimize
the chance of an interrupt being missed, the deferred interrupt handling task must be structured so that it
processes all the events that are already available between each call to xSemaphoreTake()[^17]. This is
demonstrated by Listing 7.10, which shows how a deferred interrupt handler for a UART could be structured. In
Listing 7.10, it is assumed the UART generates a receive interrupt each time a character is received, and that the
UART places received characters into a hardware FIFO (a hardware buffer).
[^17]: Alternatively, a counting semaphore, or a direct to task notification, can be used to count events.
Counting semaphores are described in the next section. Direct to task notifications are described in Chapter 9,
Task Notifications. Direct to task notifications are the preferred method as they are the most efficient in both
run time and RAM usage.
The deferred interrupt handling task used in Example 7.1 had one other weakness; it did not use a timeout
when it called xSemaphoreTake(). Instead, the task passed portMAX_DELAY as the xSemaphoreTake()
xTicksToWait parameter, which results in the task waiting indefinitely (without a timeout) for the semaphore
to be available. Indefinite timeouts are often used in example code because their use simplifies the structure of
the example, and therefore makes the example easier to understand. However, indefinite timeouts are
normally bad practice in real applications, because they make it difficult to recover from an error. As an
example, consider the scenario where a task is waiting for an interrupt to give a semaphore, but an error state
in the hardware is preventing the interrupt from being generated:
If the task is waiting without a timeout, it will not know about the error state, and will wait forever.
If the task is waiting with a timeout, then xSemaphoreTake() will return pdFAIL when the timeout
expires, and the task can then detect and clear the error the next time it executes. This scenario is also
demonstrated in Listing 7.10.
static void vUARTReceiveHandlerTask( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    /* xMaxExpectedBlockTime holds the maximum time expected between two 
       interrupts. */ 
    const TickType_t xMaxExpectedBlockTime = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 500 ); 
    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented within an infinite loop. */ 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* The semaphore is 'given' by the UART's receive (Rx) interrupt. 
           Wait a maximum of xMaxExpectedBlockTime ticks for the next 
           interrupt. */ 
        if( xSemaphoreTake( xBinarySemaphore, xMaxExpectedBlockTime ) == pdPASS) 
        { 
            /* The semaphore was obtained. Process ALL pending Rx events before 
               calling xSemaphoreTake() again. Each Rx event will have placed a 
               character in the UART's receive FIFO, and UART_RxCount() is 
               assumed to return the number of characters in the FIFO. */ 
            while( UART_RxCount() > 0 ) 
            { 
                /* UART_ProcessNextRxEvent() is assumed to process one Rx 
                   character, reducing the number of characters in the FIFO

by 1. */ 
                UART_ProcessNextRxEvent(); 
            } 
            /* No more Rx events are pending (there are no more characters in 
               the FIFO), so loop back and call xSemaphoreTake() to wait for 
               the next interrupt. Any interrupts occurring between this point 
               in the code and the call to xSemaphoreTake() will be latched in 
               the semaphore, so will not be lost. */ 
        } 
        else 
        { 
            /* An event was not received within the expected time. Check for, 
               and if necessary clear, any error conditions in the UART that 
               might be preventing the UART from generating any more 
               interrupts. */ 
            UART_ClearErrors(); 
        } 
    } 
} 
Listing 7.10 The recommended structure of a deferred interrupt processing task, using a UART receive handler as
an example
7.5 Counting Semaphores
Just as binary semaphores can be thought of as queues that have a length of one, counting semaphores can
be thought of as queues that have a length of more than one. Tasks are not interested in the data that is stored
in the queue—just the number of items in the queue. configUSE_COUNTING_SEMAPHORES must be set to 1 in
FreeRTOSConfig.h for counting semaphores to be available.
Each time a counting semaphore is 'given', another space in its queue is used. The number of items in the
queue is the semaphore's 'count' value.
Counting semaphores are typically used for two things:
1. Counting events[^18]
In this scenario, an event handler will 'give' a semaphore each time an event occurs, causing the
semaphore's count value to be incremented on each 'give'. A task will 'take' a semaphore each time it
processes an event, causing the semaphore's count value to be decremented on each 'take'. The count
value is the difference between the number of events that have occurred and the number that have
been processed. This mechanism is shown in Figure 7.8.
Counting semaphores that are used to count events are created with an initial count value of zero.
[^18]: It is more efficient to count events using a direct to task notification than it is using a counting
semaphore. Direct to task notifications are not covered until Chapter 9.
2. Resource management.

In this scenario, the count value indicates the number of resources available. To obtain control of a
resource, a task must first obtain a semaphore, which decrements the semaphore's count value. When
the count value reaches zero, there are no free resources. When a task finishes with the resource, it
'gives' the semaphore back, which increments the semaphore's count value.
Counting semaphores that are used to manage resources are created so that their initial count value
equals the number of resources that are available. Chapter 7 covers using semaphores to manage
resources.

counting semaphore to 'count' events
7.5.1 The xSemaphoreCreateCounting() API Function
 Figure 7.8 Using a

FreeRTOS also includes the xSemaphoreCreateCountingStatic() function, which allocates the memory
required to create a counting semaphore statically at compile time: Handles to all the various types of
FreeRTOS semaphores are stored in a variable of type SemaphoreHandle_t.
Before a semaphore can be used, it must be created. To create a counting semaphore, use the
xSemaphoreCreateCounting() API function.
SemaphoreHandle_t xSemaphoreCreateCounting( UBaseType_t uxMaxCount, 
                                            UBaseType_t uxInitialCount ); 
Listing 7.11 The xSemaphoreCreateCounting() API function prototype
xSemaphoreCreateCounting() parameters and return value
uxMaxCount
The maximum value to which the semaphore will count. To continue the queue analogy, the
uxMaxCount value is effectively the length of the queue.
When the semaphore is to be used to count or latch events, uxMaxCount is the maximum number of
events that can be latched.
When the semaphore is to be used to manage access to a collection of resources, uxMaxCount should
be set to the total number of resources that are available.
uxInitialCount
The initial count value of the semaphore after it has been created.
When the semaphore is to be used to count or latch events, uxInitialCount should be set to zero
(because when the semaphore is created we assume no events have occurred yet).
When the semaphore is to be used to manage access to a collection of resources, uxInitialCount
should be set to equal uxMaxCount (because when the semaphore is created we assume all the
resources are available).
Return value
If NULL is returned, the semaphore cannot be created because there is insufficient heap memory
available for FreeRTOS to allocate the semaphore data structures. Chapter 3 provides more information
on heap memory management.
If a non-NULL value is returned, it indicates that the semaphore has been created successfully. The
returned value should be stored as the handle to the created semaphore.
Example 7.2 Using a counting semaphore to synchronize a task with an interrupt
Example 7.2 improves on the Example 7.1 implementation by using a counting semaphore in place of the
binary semaphore. main() is changed to include a call to xSemaphoreCreateCounting() in place of the call
to xSemaphoreCreateBinary(). The new API call is shown in Listing 7.12.

/* Before a semaphore is used it must be explicitly created. In this example a 
   counting semaphore is created. The semaphore is created to have a maximum 
   count value of 10, and an initial count value of 0. */ 
xCountingSemaphore = xSemaphoreCreateCounting( 10, 0 ); 
Listing 7.12 The call to xSemaphoreCreateCounting() used to create the counting semaphore in Example 7.2
To simulate multiple events occurring at high frequency, the interrupt service routine is changed to 'give' the
semaphore more than once per interrupt. Each event is latched in the semaphore's count value. The modified
interrupt service routine is shown in Listing 7.13.
static uint32_t ulExampleInterruptHandler( void )
{ 
    BaseType_t xHigherPriorityTaskWoken; 
    /* The xHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter must be initialized to pdFALSE 
       as it will get set to pdTRUE inside the interrupt safe API function if 
       a context switch is required. */ 
    xHigherPriorityTaskWoken = pdFALSE; 
    /* 'Give' the semaphore multiple times. The first will unblock the deferred 
       interrupt handling task, the following 'gives' are to demonstrate that 
       the semaphore latches the events to allow the task to which interrupts 
       are deferred to process them in turn, without events getting lost. This 
       simulates multiple interrupts being received by the processor, even 
       though in this case the events are simulated within a single interrupt 
       occurrence. */ 
    xSemaphoreGiveFromISR( xCountingSemaphore, &xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
    xSemaphoreGiveFromISR( xCountingSemaphore, &xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
    xSemaphoreGiveFromISR( xCountingSemaphore, &xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
    /* Pass the xHigherPriorityTaskWoken value into portYIELD_FROM_ISR(). 
       If xHigherPriorityTaskWoken was set to pdTRUE inside 
       xSemaphoreGiveFromISR() then calling portYIELD_FROM_ISR() will request 
       a context switch. If xHigherPriorityTaskWoken is still pdFALSE then 
       calling portYIELD_FROM_ISR() will have no effect. Unlike most FreeRTOS 
       ports, the Windows port requires the ISR to return a value - the return 
       statement is inside the Windows version of portYIELD_FROM_ISR(). */ 
    portYIELD_FROM_ISR( xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
} 
Listing 7.13 The implementation of the interrupt service routine used by Example 7.2
All the other functions remain unmodified from those used in Example 7.1.
The output produced when Example 7.2 is executed is shown in Figure 7.9. As can be seen, the task to which
interrupt handling is deferred processes all three (simulated) events each time an interrupt is generated. The
events are latched into the count value of the semaphore, allowing the task to process them in turn.

Figure 7.9 The output produced when Example 7.2 is executed
7.6 Deferring Work to the RTOS Daemon Task
The deferred interrupt handling examples presented so far have required the application writer to create a task
for each interrupt that uses the deferred processing technique. It is also possible to use the
xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR()[^19] API function to defer interrupt processing to the RTOS daemon
task, which removes the need to create a separate task for each interrupt. Deferring interrupt processing to the
daemon task is called 'centralized deferred interrupt processing'.
[^19]: The daemon task was originally called the timer service task because it was originally only used to
execute software timer callback functions. Hence, xTimerPendFunctionCall() is implemented in timers.c,
and, in accordance with the convention of prefixing a function's name with the name of the file in which the
function is implemented, the function's name is prefixed with 'Timer'.
Chapter 6 described how software timer-related FreeRTOS API functions send commands to the daemon task
on the timer command queue. The xTimerPendFunctionCall() and xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR()
API functions use the same timer command queue to send an 'execute function' command to the daemon
task. The function sent to the daemon task is then executed in the context of the daemon task.
Advantages of centralized deferred interrupt processing include:
Lower resource usage
It removes the need to create a separate task for each deferred interrupt.
Simplified user model
The deferred interrupt handling function is a standard C function.
Disadvantages of centralized deferred interrupt processing include:
Less flexibility

It is not possible to set the priority of each deferred interrupt handling task separately. Each deferred
interrupt handling function executes at the priority of the daemon task. As described in Chapter 6, the
priority of the daemon task is set by the configTIMER_TASK_PRIORITY compile time configuration
constant within FreeRTOSConfig.h.
Less determinism
xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() sends a command to the back of the timer command queue.
Commands that were already in the timer command queue will be processed by the daemon task before
the 'execute function' command sent to the queue by xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR().
Different interrupts have different timing constraints, so it is common to use both methods of deferring
interrupt processing within the same application.
7.6.1 The xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() API Function
xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() is the interrupt safe version of xTimerPendFunctionCall(). Both API
functions allow a function provided by the application writer to be executed by, and therefore in the context
of, the RTOS daemon task. Both the function to be executed, and the value of the function's input parameters,
are sent to the daemon task on the timer command queue. When the function actually executes is therefore
dependent on the priority of the daemon task relative to other tasks in the application.
BaseType_t xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR( PendedFunction_t 
                                          xFunctionToPend, 
                                          void *pvParameter1, 
                                          uint32_t ulParameter2, 
                                          BaseType_t *pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
Listing 7.14 The xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() API function prototype
void vPendableFunction( void *pvParameter1, uint32_t ulParameter2 ); 
Listing 7.15 The prototype to which a function passed in the xFunctionToPend parameter of
xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() must conform
xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() parameters and return value
xFunctionToPend
A pointer to the function that will be executed in the daemon task (in effect, just the function name). The
prototype of the function must be the same as that shown in Listing 7.15.
pvParameter1
The value that will be passed into the function that is executed by the daemon task as that function's
pvParameter1 parameter. The parameter has a void * type to allow it to be used to pass any data
type. For example, integer types can be directly cast to a void *, alternatively the void * can be used
to point to a structure.

ulParameter2
The value that will be passed into the function that is executed by the daemon task as that function's
ulParameter2 parameter.
pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken
xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() writes to the timer command queue. If the RTOS daemon task
was in the Blocked state to wait for data to become available on the timer command queue, then writing
to the timer command queue will cause the daemon task to leave the Blocked state. If the priority of the
daemon task is higher than the priority of the currently executing task (the task that was interrupted),
then, internally, xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() will set *pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken to
pdTRUE.
If xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() sets this value to pdTRUE, then a context switch must be
performed before the interrupt is exited. This will ensure that the interrupt returns directly to the
daemon task, as the daemon task will be the highest priority Ready state task.
Return value
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS
pdPASS will be returned if the 'execute function' command was written to the timer command
queue.
pdFAIL
pdFAIL will be returned if the 'execute function' command could not be written to the timer
command queue because the timer command queue was already full. Chapter 6 describes how to
set the length of the timer command queue.
Example 7.3 Centralized deferred interrupt processing
Example 7.3 provides similar functionality to Example 7.1, but without using a semaphore, and without creating
a task specifically to perform the processing necessitated by the interrupt. Instead, the processing is performed
by the RTOS daemon task.
The interrupt service routine used by Example 7.3 is shown in Listing 7.16. It calls
xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() to pass a pointer to a function called vDeferredHandlingFunction()
to the daemon task. The deferred interrupt processing is performed by the vDeferredHandlingFunction()
function.
The interrupt service routine increments a variable called ulParameterValue each time it executes.
ulParameterValue is used as the value of ulParameter2 in the call to xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR(),
so it will also be used as the value of ulParameter2 in the call to vDeferredHandlingFunction() when
vDeferredHandlingFunction() is executed by the daemon task. The function's other parameter,
pvParameter1, is not used in this example.

static uint32_t ulExampleInterruptHandler( void )
{ 
    static uint32_t ulParameterValue = 0; 
    BaseType_t xHigherPriorityTaskWoken; 
    /* The xHigherPriorityTaskWoken parameter must be initialized to pdFALSE 
       as it will get set to pdTRUE inside the interrupt safe API function if 
       a context switch is required. */ 
    xHigherPriorityTaskWoken = pdFALSE; 
    /* Send a pointer to the interrupt's deferred handling function to the 
       daemon task. The deferred handling function's pvParameter1 parameter 
       is not used so just set to NULL. The deferred handling function's 
       ulParameter2 parameter is used to pass a number that is incremented by 
       one each time this interrupt handler executes. */ 
    xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR( vDeferredHandlingFunction, /* Function to 
execute */ 
                                   NULL, /* Not used */ 
                                   ulParameterValue, /* Incrementing value. */ 
                                   &xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
    ulParameterValue++; 
    /* Pass the xHigherPriorityTaskWoken value into portYIELD_FROM_ISR(). If 
       xHigherPriorityTaskWoken was set to pdTRUE inside 
       xTimerPendFunctionCallFromISR() then calling portYIELD_FROM_ISR() will 
       request a context switch. If xHigherPriorityTaskWoken is still pdFALSE 
       then calling portYIELD_FROM_ISR() will have no effect. Unlike most 
       FreeRTOS ports, the Windows port requires the ISR to return a value - 
       the return statement is inside the Windows version 
       of portYIELD_FROM_ISR(). */ 
    portYIELD_FROM_ISR( xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
} 
Listing 7.16 The software interrupt handler used in Example 7.3
The implementation of vDeferredHandlingFunction() is shown in Listing 7.17. It prints out a fixed string,
and the value of its ulParameter2 parameter.
vDeferredHandlingFunction() must have the prototype shown in Listing 7.15, even though, in this example,
only one of its parameters is actually used.
static void vDeferredHandlingFunction( void *pvParameter1, uint32_t ulParameter2 )
{ 
    /* Process the event - in this case just print out a message and the value 
       of ulParameter2. pvParameter1 is not used in this example. */ 
    vPrintStringAndNumber( "Handler function - Processing event ", ulParameter2 ); 
} 
Listing 7.17 The function that performs the processing necessitated by the interrupt in Example 7.3

The main() function used by Example 7.3 is shown in Listing 7.18. It is simpler than the main() function used
by Example 7.1 because it does not create either a semaphore or a task to perform the deferred interrupt
processing.
vPeriodicTask() is the task that periodically generates software interrupts. It is created with a priority below
the priority of the daemon task to ensure it is pre-empted by the daemon task as soon as the daemon task
leaves the Blocked state.
int main( void )
{ 
    /* The task that generates the software interrupt is created at a priority 
       below the priority of the daemon task. The priority of the daemon task 
       is set by the configTIMER_TASK_PRIORITY compile time configuration 
       constant in FreeRTOSConfig.h. */ 
    const UBaseType_t ulPeriodicTaskPriority = configTIMER_TASK_PRIORITY - 1; 
    /* Create the task that will periodically generate a software interrupt. */ 
    xTaskCreate( vPeriodicTask, "Periodic", 1000, NULL, ulPeriodicTaskPriority, 
                 NULL ); 
    /* Install the handler for the software interrupt. The syntax necessary to 
       do this is dependent on the FreeRTOS port being used. The syntax shown 
       here can only be used with the FreeRTOS windows port, where such 
       interrupts are only simulated. */ 
    vPortSetInterruptHandler( mainINTERRUPT_NUMBER, ulExampleInterruptHandler ); 
    /* Start the scheduler so the created task starts executing. */ 
    vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    /* As normal, the following line should never be reached. */ 
    for( ;; ); 
} 
Listing 7.18 The implementation of main() for Example 7.3
Example 7.3 produces the output shown in Figure 7.10. The priority of the daemon task is higher than the
priority of the task that generates the software interrupt, so vDeferredHandlingFunction() is executed by
the daemon task as soon as the interrupt is generated. That results in the message output by
vDeferredHandlingFunction() appear in between the two messages output by the periodic task, just as it
did when a semaphore was used to unblock a dedicated deferred interrupt processing task. Further
explanation is provided in Figure 7.11.

Figure 7.10 The output produced when Example 7.3 is executed
Figure 7.11 The sequence of execution when Example 7.3 is executed
7.7 Using Queues within an Interrupt Service Routine
Binary and counting semaphores are used to communicate events. Queues are used to communicate events
and to transfer data.
xQueueSendToFrontFromISR() is the version of xQueueSendToFront() that is safe to use in an interrupt
service routine, xQueueSendToBackFromISR() is the version of xQueueSendToBack() that is safe to use in an
interrupt service routine, and xQueueReceiveFromISR() is the version of xQueueReceive() that is safe to use
in an interrupt service routine.

7.7.1 The xQueueSendToFrontFromISR() and xQueueSendToBackFromISR() API Functions
BaseType_t xQueueSendToFrontFromISR( QueueHandle_t xQueue, 
                                     const void *pvItemToQueue 
                                     BaseType_t *pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
Listing 7.19 The xQueueSendToFrontFromISR() API function prototype
BaseType_t xQueueSendToBackFromISR( QueueHandle_t xQueue, 
                                    const void *pvItemToQueue 
                                    BaseType_t *pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
Listing 7.20 The xQueueSendToBackFromISR() API function prototype
xQueueSendFromISR() and xQueueSendToBackFromISR() are functionally equivalent.
xQueueSendToFrontFromISR() and xQueueSendToBackFromISR() parameters and return values
xQueue
The handle of the queue to which the data is being sent (written). The queue handle will have been
returned from the call to xQueueCreate() used to create the queue.
pvItemToQueue
A pointer to the item that is to be placed on the queue.
The size of each item the queue will hold was defined when the queue was created, so this many bytes
will be copied from pvItemToQueue into the queue storage area.
pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken
It is possible that a single queue will have one or more tasks blocked on it, waiting for data to become
available. Calling xQueueSendToFrontFromISR() or xQueueSendToBackFromISR() can make data
available, and so cause such a task to leave the Blocked state. If calling the API function causes a task to
leave the Blocked state, and the unblocked task has a priority higher than the currently executing task
(the task that was interrupted), then, internally, the API function will set *pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken
to pdTRUE.
If xQueueSendToFrontFromISR() or xQueueSendToBackFromISR() sets this value to pdTRUE, then a
context switch should be performed before the interrupt is exited. This will ensure that the interrupt
returns directly to the highest priority Ready state task.
Return value
There are two possible return values:
pdPASS

pdPASS is returned only if data has been sent successfully to the queue.
`errQUEUE_FULL
errQUEUE_FULL is returned if data cannot be sent to the queue because the queue is already full.
7.7.2 Considerations When Using a Queue From an ISR
Queues provide an easy and convenient way of passing data from an interrupt to a task, but it is not efficient
to use a queue if data is arriving at a high frequency.
Many of the demo applications in the FreeRTOS download include a simple UART driver that uses a queue to
pass characters out of the UART's receive ISR. In those demos a queue is used for two reasons: to demonstrate
queues being used from an ISR, and to deliberately load the system in order to test the FreeRTOS port. The
ISRs that use a queue in this manner are definitely not intended to represent an efficient design, and unless the
data is arriving slowly, it is recommended that production code does not copy this technique. More efficient
techniques, that are suitable for production code, include:
Using Direct Memory Access (DMA) hardware to receive and buffer characters. This method has
practically no software overhead. A direct to task notification[^20] can then be used to unblock the task
that will process the buffer only after a break in transmission has been detected.
[^20]: Direct to task notifications provide the most efficient method of unblocking a task from an ISR.
Direct to task notifications are covered in Chapter 9, Task Notifications.
Copying each received character into a thread safe RAM buffer[^21]. Again, a direct to task notification
can be used to unblock the task that will process the buffer after a complete message has been received,
or after a break in transmission has been detected.
[^21]: The 'Stream Buffer', provided as part of FreeRTOS+TCP (https://www.FreeRTOS.org/tcp), can be
used for this purpose.
Processing the received characters directly within the ISR, then using a queue to send just the result of
processing the data (rather than the raw data) to a task. This was previously demonstrated by Figure 5.4.
Example 7.4 Sending and receiving on a queue from within an interrupt
This example demonstrates xQueueSendToBackFromISR() and xQueueReceiveFromISR() being used within
the same interrupt. As before, for convenience the interrupt is generated by software.
A periodic task is created that sends five numbers to a queue every 200 milliseconds. It generates a software
interrupt only after all five values have been sent. The task implementation is shown in Listing 7.21.
static void vIntegerGenerator( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    TickType_t xLastExecutionTime; 
    uint32_t ulValueToSend = 0; 
    int i; 
    /* Initialize the variable used by the call to vTaskDelayUntil(). */

xLastExecutionTime = xTaskGetTickCount(); 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* This is a periodic task. Block until it is time to run again. The 
           task will execute every 200ms. */ 
        vTaskDelayUntil( &xLastExecutionTime, pdMS_TO_TICKS( 200 ) ); 
        /* Send five numbers to the queue, each value one higher than the 
           previous value. The numbers are read from the queue by the interrupt 
           service routine. The interrupt service routine always empties the 
           queue, so this task is guaranteed to be able to write all five 
           values without needing to specify a block time. */ 
        for( i = 0; i < 5; i++ ) 
        { 
            xQueueSendToBack( xIntegerQueue, &ulValueToSend, 0 ); 
            ulValueToSend++; 
        } 
        /* Generate the interrupt so the interrupt service routine can read the 
           values from the queue. The syntax used to generate a software 
           interrupt is dependent on the FreeRTOS port being used. The syntax 
           used below can only be used with the FreeRTOS Windows port, in which 
           such interrupts are only simulated. */ 
        vPrintString( "Generator task - About to generate an interrupt.\r\n" ); 
        vPortGenerateSimulatedInterrupt( mainINTERRUPT_NUMBER ); 
        vPrintString( "Generator task - Interrupt generated.\r\n\r\n\r\n" ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 7.21 The implementation of the task that writes to the queue in Example 7.4
The interrupt service routine calls xQueueReceiveFromISR() repeatedly until all the values written to the
queue by the periodic task have been read out, and the queue is left empty. The last two bits of each received
value are used as an index into an array of strings. A pointer to the string at the corresponding index position
is then sent to a different queue using a call to xQueueSendFromISR(). The implementation of the interrupt
service routine is shown in Listing 7.22.
static uint32_t ulExampleInterruptHandler( void )
{ 
    BaseType_t xHigherPriorityTaskWoken; 
    uint32_t ulReceivedNumber; 
    /* The strings are declared static const to ensure they are not allocated 
       on the interrupt service routine's stack, and so exist even when the 
       interrupt service routine is not executing. */ 
    static const char *pcStrings[] = 
    { 
        "String 0\r\n", 
        "String 1\r\n",

"String 2\r\n", 
        "String 3\r\n" 
    }; 
    /* As always, xHigherPriorityTaskWoken is initialized to pdFALSE to be 
       able to detect it getting set to pdTRUE inside an interrupt safe API 
       function.  Note that as an interrupt safe API function can only set 
       xHigherPriorityTaskWoken to pdTRUE, it is safe to use the same 
       xHigherPriorityTaskWoken variable in both the call to 
       xQueueReceiveFromISR() and the call to xQueueSendToBackFromISR(). */ 
    xHigherPriorityTaskWoken = pdFALSE; 
    /* Read from the queue until the queue is empty. */ 
    while( xQueueReceiveFromISR( xIntegerQueue, 
                                 &ulReceivedNumber, 
                                 &xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ) != errQUEUE_EMPTY ) 
    { 
        /* Truncate the received value to the last two bits (values 0 to 3 
           inclusive), then use the truncated value as an index into the 
           pcStrings[] array to select a string (char *) to send on the other 
           queue. */ 
        ulReceivedNumber &= 0x03; 
        xQueueSendToBackFromISR( xStringQueue, 
                                 &pcStrings[ ulReceivedNumber ], 
                                 &xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
    } 
    /* If receiving from xIntegerQueue caused a task to leave the Blocked 
       state, and if the priority of the task that left the Blocked state is 
       higher than the priority of the task in the Running state, then 
       xHigherPriorityTaskWoken will have been set to pdTRUE inside 
       xQueueReceiveFromISR(). 
       If sending to xStringQueue caused a task to leave the Blocked state, and 
       if the priority of the task that left the Blocked state is higher than 
       the priority of the task in the Running state, then 
       xHigherPriorityTaskWoken will have been set to pdTRUE inside 
       xQueueSendToBackFromISR(). 
       xHigherPriorityTaskWoken is used as the parameter to portYIELD_FROM_ISR(). 
       If xHigherPriorityTaskWoken equals pdTRUE then calling portYIELD_FROM_ISR() 
       will request a context switch. If xHigherPriorityTaskWoken is still 
       pdFALSE then calling portYIELD_FROM_ISR() will have no effect. 
       The implementation of portYIELD_FROM_ISR() used by the Windows port 
       includes a return statement, which is why this function does not 
       explicitly return a value. */ 
    portYIELD_FROM_ISR( xHigherPriorityTaskWoken ); 
} 
Listing 7.22 The implementation of the interrupt service routine used by Example 7.4

The task that receives the character pointers from the interrupt service routine blocks on the queue until a
message arrives, printing out each string as it is received. Its implementation is shown in Listing 7.23.
static void vStringPrinter( void *pvParameters )
{ 
    char *pcString; 
    for( ;; ) 
    { 
        /* Block on the queue to wait for data to arrive. */ 
        xQueueReceive( xStringQueue, &pcString, portMAX_DELAY ); 
        /* Print out the string received. */ 
        vPrintString( pcString ); 
    } 
} 
Listing 7.23 The task that prints out the strings received from the interrupt service routine in Example 7.4
As normal, main() creates the required queues and tasks before starting the scheduler. Its implementation is
shown in Listing 7.24.
int main( void )
{ 
    /* Before a queue can be used it must first be created. Create both queues 
       used by this example. One queue can hold variables of type uint32_t, the 
       other queue can hold variables of type char*. Both queues can hold a 
       maximum of 10 items. A real application should check the return values 
       to ensure the queues have been successfully created. */ 
    xIntegerQueue = xQueueCreate( 10, sizeof( uint32_t ) ); 
    xStringQueue = xQueueCreate( 10, sizeof( char * ) ); 
    /* Create the task that uses a queue to pass integers to the interrupt 
       service routine. The task is created at priority 1. */ 
    xTaskCreate( vIntegerGenerator, "IntGen", 1000, NULL, 1, NULL ); 
    /* Create the task that prints out the strings sent to it from the 
       interrupt service routine. This task is created at the higher 
       priority of 2. */ 
    xTaskCreate( vStringPrinter, "String", 1000, NULL, 2, NULL ); 
    /* Install the handler for the software interrupt. The syntax necessary to 
       do this is dependent on the FreeRTOS port being used. The syntax shown 
       here can only be used with the FreeRTOS Windows port, where such 
       interrupts are only simulated. */ 
    vPortSetInterruptHandler( mainINTERRUPT_NUMBER, ulExampleInterruptHandler ); 
    /* Start the scheduler so the created tasks start executing. */ 
    vTaskStartScheduler(); 
    /* If all is well then main() will never reach here as the scheduler will

now be running the tasks. If main() does reach here then it is likely 
       that there was insufficient heap memory available for the idle task 
       to be created. Chapter 2 provides more information on heap memory 
       management. */ 
    for( ;; ); 
} 
Listing 7.24 The main() function for Example 7.4
The output produced when Example 7.4 is executed is shown in Figure 7.12. As can be seen, the interrupt
receives all five integers, and produces five strings in response. More explanation is given in Figure 7.13.
Figure 7.12 The output produced when Example 7.4 is executed

Figure 7.13 The sequence of execution produced by Example 7.4
7.8 Interrupt Nesting
It is common for confusion to arise between task priorities and interrupt priorities. This section discusses
interrupt priorities, which are the priorities at which interrupt service routines (ISRs) execute relative to each
other. The priority assigned to a task is in no way related to the priority assigned to an interrupt. Hardware
decides when an ISR will execute, whereas software decides when a task will execute. An ISR executed in
response to a hardware interrupt will interrupt a task, but a task cannot pre-empt an ISR.
Ports that support interrupt nesting require one or both of the constants detailed below to be defined in
FreeRTOSConfig.h. configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY and
configMAX_API_CALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY both define the same property. Older FreeRTOS ports use
configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY, and newer FreeRTOS ports use
configMAX_API_CALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY.
Constants that control interrupt nesting
configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY or configMAX_API_CALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY
Sets the highest interrupt priority from which interrupt-safe FreeRTOS API functions can be called.
configKERNEL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY
Sets the interrupt priority used by the tick interrupt, and must always be set to the lowest possible
interrupt priority.

If the FreeRTOS port in use does not also use the configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY constant,
then any interrupt that uses interrupt-safe FreeRTOS API functions must also execute at the priority
defined by configKERNEL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY.
Each interrupt source has a numeric priority, and a logical priority:
Numeric priority
The numeric priority is simply the number assigned to the interrupt priority. For example, if an interrupt
is assigned a priority of 7, then its numeric priority is 7. Likewise, if an interrupt is assigned a priority of
200, then its numeric priority is 200.
Logical priority
An interrupt's logical priority describes that interrupt's precedence over other interrupts.
If two interrupts of differing priority occur at the same time, then the processor will execute the ISR for
whichever of the two interrupts has the higher logical priority before it executes the ISR for whichever of
the two interrupts has the lower logical priority.
An interrupt can interrupt (nest with) any interrupt that has a lower logical priority, but an interrupt
cannot interrupt (nest with) any interrupt that has an equal or higher logical priority.
The relationship between an interrupt's numeric priority and logical priority is dependent on the processor
architecture; on some processors, the higher the numeric priority assigned to an interrupt the higher that
interrupt's logical priority will be, while on other processor architectures the higher the numeric priority
assigned to an interrupt the lower that interrupt's logical priority will be.
A full interrupt nesting model is created by setting configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY to a higher
logical interrupt priority than configKERNEL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY. This is demonstrated in Figure 7.14,
which shows a scenario where:
The processor has seven unique interrupt priorities.
Interrupts assigned a numeric priority of 7 have a higher logical priority than interrupts assigned a
numeric priority of 1.
configKERNEL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY is set to one.
configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY is set to three.

Figure 7.14 Constants affecting interrupt nesting behavior
Referring to Figure 7.14:
Interrupts that use priorities 1 to 3, inclusive, are prevented from executing while the kernel or the
application is inside a critical section. ISRs running at these priorities can use interrupt-safe FreeRTOS API
functions. Critical sections are described in Chapter 7.
Interrupts that use priority 4, or above, are not affected by critical sections, so nothing the scheduler
does will prevent these interrupts from executing immediately—within the limitations of the hardware
itself. ISRs executing at these priorities cannot use any FreeRTOS API functions.
Typically, functionality that requires very strict timing accuracy (motor control, for example) would use a
priority above configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY to ensure the scheduler does not introduce
jitter into the interrupt response time.
7.8.1 A Note to ARM Cortex-M[^22] and ARM GIC Users
[^22]: This section only partially applies to Cortex-M0 and Cortex-M0+ cores.
Interrupt configuration on Cortex-M processors is confusing, and prone to error. To assist your development,
the FreeRTOS Cortex-M ports automatically check the interrupt configuration, but only if configASSERT() is
defined. configASSERT() is described in section 11.2.
The ARM Cortex cores, and ARM Generic Interrupt Controllers (GICs), use numerically low priority numbers to
represent logically high priority interrupts. This can seem counter-intuitive, and is easy to forget. If you wish to
assign an interrupt a logically low priority, then it must be assigned a numerically high value. If you wish to
assign an interrupt a logically high priority, then it must be assigned a numerically low value.
The Cortex-M interrupt controller allows a maximum of eight bits to be used to specify each interrupt priority,
making 255 the lowest possible priority. Zero is the highest priority. However, Cortex-M microcontrollers

normally only implement a subset of the eight possible bits. The number of bits actually implemented is
dependent on the microcontroller family.
When only a subset of the eight possible bits has been implemented, it is only the most significant bits of the
byte that can be used—leaving the least significant bits unimplemented. Unimplemented bits can take any
value, but it is normal to set them to 1. This is demonstrated by Figure 7.15, which shows how a priority of
binary 101 is stored in a Cortex-M microcontroller that implements four priority bits.
a priority of binary 101 is stored by a Cortex-M microcontroller that implements four priority bits
 Figure 7.15 How
In Figure 7.15 the binary value 101 has been shifted into the most significant four bits because the least
significant four bits are not implemented. The unimplemented bits have been set to 1.
Some library functions expect priority values to be specified after they have been shifted up into the
implemented (most significant) bits. When using such a function, the priority shown in Figure 7.15 can be
specified as decimal 95. Decimal 95 is binary 101 shifted up by four to make binary 101nnnn (where 'n' is an
unimplemented bit), and with the unimplemented bits set to 1 to make binary 1011111.
Some library functions expect priority values to be specified before they have been shifted up into the
implemented (most significant) bits. When using such a function the priority shown in Figure 7.15 must be
specified as decimal 5. Decimal 5 is binary 101 without any shift.
configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY and configKERNEL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY must be specified in
a way that allows them to be written directly to the Cortex-M registers, so after the priority values have been
shifted up into the implemented bits.
configKERNEL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY must always be set to the lowest possible interrupt priority.
Unimplemented priority bits can be set to 1, so the constant can always be set to 255, no matter how many
priority bits are actually implemented.
Cortex-M interrupts will default to a priority of zero—the highest possible priority. The implementation of the
Cortex-M hardware does not permit configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY to be set to 0, so the priority
of an interrupt that uses the FreeRTOS API must never be left at its default value.

